
\setvariables[article][shortauthor={}, date={}, issue={}, DOI={}]



\usebtxdataset[unitTestMarkdowns/references.bib.bib]
\setupbtxrendering[default]
                   [numbering=no, alternative=cite]



\environment env_journal
\startcomponent 


\startchapter[title={}, marking={}, reference={}]


\startlines
{\bf
}
\stoplines

\startblockquote
\startitemize[packed]
\item
  rather bear those ills we had,\crlf
\item
  Than fly to others, that we knew not of. \{.red\}
\stopitemize
\stopblockquote

\section[header-red]{Header red}

We should talk about this template. Some things to discuss:

\startitemize[packed]
\item
  separate bib file?
\item
  yaml metadata
\item
  tests for correct submission
\stopitemize

Il est désormais difficile de nier le changement fondamental de
paradigme que représente l'édition numérique des textes. Du projet
Gutenberg de 1971 au projet HyperNietzche actuellement développé au sein
de l'ITEM, les éditions numériques ont évolué d'une simple transcription
de texte jusqu'à devenir des outils perfectionnés d'analyse, qui ont
changé notre façon de comprendre et d'étudier les textes. Tout au long
de ce processus, malheureusement, de nombreux corpus importants de la
littérature ont été laissés pour compte. Au cours des années 1990, la
généralisation de l'internet a coïncidé avec une migration en masse des
textes papier vers un support numérique. Mais cet effort étant
nécessairement lié à un appui institutionnel et financier massif, la
plus grande partie de ces efforts de numérisation ont porté sur les
canons bibliographiques de l'Amérique du Nord et de l'Europe. D'autres
champs littéraires, dont l'immense majorité des corpus de la sphère
francophone (Afrique, Caraïbe essentiellement), n'ont pas été pris en
compte, pour des raisons diverses (institutionnelles, technologiques,
juridiques etc.) En ce début de XXIème siècle, au moment où l'attention
s'est déplacée de la numérisation à la création d'outils d'analyse qui
pourraient être appliqués à l'énorme quantité de données collectées, il
est devenu encore plus difficile d'obtenir des fonds pour les projets de
numérisation à grande échelle de ces littératures négligées. Une
solution provisoire, donc, consiste à créer des éditions numériques
d'œuvres-clé de ces grands corpus, en laissant de côté pour le moment la
numérisation massive des fonds d'archives. L'édition d'une pièce d'Aimé
Césaire se propose donc un but démonstratif et exemplaire. Appelons
cette solution la micro-numérisation.

Parmi les nombreux défis qui sont à relever par les équipes d'édition
numérique, dans le cas d'objets éditoriaux complexes, l'un des plus
délicats reste de réussir la collecte et de bien choisir ses stratégies
de représentation éditoriale. Les textes de Césaire publiés sous le
titre Et les chiens se taisaient sont l'un de ces objets éditoriaux
complexes. Réunir dans un seul espace en ligne les matériaux disparates
(tapuscrits, livres imprimés, enregistrements, film) qui constituent
cette archive sera déjà une réussite considérable. Mais nous désirons ne
pas nous arrêter là. Si la tâche de l'édition génétique, comme Walter
Benjamin le disait de l'histoire matérialiste, consiste à « prendre
possession de la mémoire, dans le cillement d'un éclair au moment du
danger »{[}1{]} -- en l'occurrence une suite d'actes poétiques réalisés
par Aimé Césaire et ses collaborateurs{[}2{]}-- alors il nous faut une
édition qui puisse : 1) isoler ce que Jerome McGann{[}3{]} appelle le
code linguistique (les mots) et le code bibliographique (l'arrangement,
la typographie, le support matériel, etc. de façon à ne pas déstabiliser
leur équilibre délicat{[}4{]} ; 2) représenter de façon dynamique la
trajectoire et l'interrelation entre les éléments des différents états
du texte, afin de nous permettre de recréer le long processus génétique
de l'archive. L'absence de coordination entre ces deux fonctionnalités a
imposé jusqu'à aujourd'hui une séparation entre les outils d'analyse et
la représentation des textes en ligne. Pour nous, l'avenir de l'édition
génétique suppose la capacité de joindre l'analyse à la représentation.
Les ressources technologiques n'ont pas encore permis de concrétiser
toutes nos intentions, mais notre but est de faire reculer les limites
actuelles.

\startblockquote
At the limit of an always increasing elimination of references and
finalities, an ever-increasing loss of resemblances and designations, we
find the digital and programmatic sign, whose \quotation{value} is
purely {\em tactical}, at the intersection of other signals
(\quotation{bits} of information/tests) whose structure is that of a
micromolecular code of command and control (Baudrillard and Poster 1988,
139--40).
\stopblockquote

Roman Jakobson called such construction and deconstruction of meaning
the \quotation{profuse exchange of ritualized formulas} or the phatic
function of language (Malinowski et al. 1923, 146; Jakobson 1960, 355).
In the phatic function lies the essence of programming. Code shapes and
commands. At the same time, it conjures fantastical metaphors to occlude
the structure of shaping and commanding. Simulation obscures the
incongruence between visible representation and the underlying material
affordances of the medium. What you see is not always what you get. We
are instead confronted with a composite image, which under examination
reveals a complex process of transfiguration between the visible sign
and the sign at the site of the inscription. When reading online, for
example, we observe what looks like a book, where we should also
perceive an attempt to sensor and surveil. The simulation is without a
referent. It bares no resemblance to the material substratum of
electronic reading. We believe we are handling a book. Our ideas about
reading and interpretation subsequently rely on that initial physical
point of contact with paper. But when reading electronically, we are
handling something other than print material. The resemblance to paper
guides our intuitions about the possibilities of the medium: the ability
to scroll, bookmark, or turn pages. We have far fewer intuitions about
the affordances of inscription at the micromolecular level. As we
\quotation{turn the page} an electric charge crosses the impenetrable
oxide barrier to reach the floating gate through quantum tunnelling
(Pavan et al. 1997; Aaron and Leburton 2002; Bez et al. 2003).

Unlike figurative language, machine control languages function in the
imperative. They do not stand for action---they are action. Code
represents only the exercise of power. More binding than the
\quotation{speech acts} J.L. Austin, control codes arrange and regulate.
The difference between representation and control is one of brute force.
It lies in the distinction between a restraining order and physical
restraint. A restraining order {\em represents} the calling forth of
codified power. Physical restraints like handcuffs {\em enact} the
exercise of codified power. Like all violence they do not stand for
anything. Stripped of references, resemblances, and designations, they
are in themselves an arrangement and rearrangement of matter. The
handcuffs contort the body into the shape of submission. Absent a body,
the restraints draw an empty shape.

Code acts similarly to shape the word. Located somewhere between idea
and material, formatting relates content to matter. It mediates by
imposing structure. Think of a paragraph, for example. By convention,
writers use paragraphs to break up the flow of monolithic thought on a
page. The paragraph contains information. Can we imagine an empty
paragraph? Can the shape of the paragraph persist outside of the
material confines of the page or the screen? Can one imagine a paragraph
that unfolds spatially not in two dimensions, but in one, along a
straight line? What about a three dimensional paragraph? Could it take
the shape of a cuboid instead instead of a rectangle? These questions
boggle the mind because the paragraph draws a singular shape. It is a
textual container of a type. Any other shape less or more than the
paragraph would go by another name. It would constitute another format.
To imagine something like a one-dimensional paragraph is akin to
imagining a flat shoebox. A flat shoebox could no longer hold shoes. It
would contain something else like images of footwear. Similarly, a
paragraph identifies a particular arrangement of elements. It is a box
or a data structure of a shape, made to hold words and sentences. Like
nesting dolls, words and sentences are in themselves data structures
that contain further, smaller arrangements of information. One could
say, what of such arrangements? Who cares about paragraphs? It is merely
one type of a container among many. It has only an instrumental function
to help get the point across. The meat of interpretation lies in the
stuff within. Words come in other shapes and sizes. The outer container
is disposable and therefore insignificant.

Formats could only seem insignificant in the past when they were few and
simple. The transition between static and dynamic media necessitates
renewed attention to the formatting layer of meaning making. What you
saw is what you got on the page. On the screen, what you see is but a
small part of what you get. The content---all that is contained on a
page---shifts beneath the projected image. In print, content can be
gleaned from the surface. There is nothing but surface on a page. The
screen is a layered surface. Sandwiched between panes of glass, liquid
crystal moves in response to electrical modulation. The ebb and flow of
electricity in turn reflects yet another layer of codification,
inscribed onto yet other recondite planes of inscription. A byte, made
up of eight binary bits, holds a letter. The string of letters spelling
out \quotation{hello world} occupies eleven bytes, if you count the
space. A file in the Portable Document Format (\type{.pdf}) containing
nothing but \quotation{hello world} takes up 24,335 bytes on my system.
Encoding accounts for the disparity between plain text and fancy text,
the latter defined as \quotation{text representation consisting of plain
text plus added information} (Unicode Consortium 1990).

\placefigure{Forms and formats.}{\externalfigure[images/forms.png]}

In cognitive metaphor theory, the kind of resemblances that we have been
discussing so far are called {\em structural metaphors}.
\quotation{Structural metaphors allow us to do much more than just
orient concepts,} Lakoff and Johnson wrote (Lakoff and Johnson 1980a,
61). Grounded in \quotation{systematic correlations within our
experience,} structural metaphors transfer organizing principles from
one domain to another. Thus to say something like \quotation{time is
money} is to suggest that something in the arrangement of the financial
system correlates systematically to something in the arrangement of the
temporal system (Lakoff and Johnson 1980a, 65--68). It is a structural
and not just a semantic similarity. If metaphors work by transferring
qualities, structure is the quality being transferred in all of the
above cases. Structural metaphors organize one thing in the shape of
another. They are for this reason key to understanding the transference
that takes place in the interface between human and machine.

\startblockquote
a shared books with database metaphor, a reference books metaphor, and a
card catalog metaphor in one system that allows large object oriented
data bases to be organized and accessed in an exclusive environment and
in addition allows access to screen icons, creates a visual hierarchy of
related and shared objects, and allows mutually exclusive access to the
metaphors within the library (Pajak 1992, 1).
\stopblockquote

In the so-called classical view, metaphors are simply a type of
figurative language. To say \quotation{the day stands tiptoe on the
misty mountain tops} is to use the verb \quotation{stand} in a novel
linguistic context. Days have no literal legs to stand on. John Searle,
George Lakoff, and Mark Turner, among others, have argued that metaphors
are more broadly a cognitive phenomenon, mapping distinct ontological
categories across \quotation{conceptual domains} (Lakoff and Johnson
1980a; Turner 1987; Lakoff 1998, Searle (1998)). In the modified view,
even such basic semantic concepts as \quotation{state, quantity, action,
cause, purpose, means, modality} are metaphorical in nature (Lakoff and
Johnson 1980b; Lakoff 1998, 212). Beyond figurative lyrical language,
Lakoff and others have argued that metaphors broadly structure everyday
experience. Thus the analysis of common phrases like \quotation{things
are looking up} and \quotation{I can't get that tune out of my mind}
reveals underlying figuration like \quotation{good things are up} and
\quotation{the mind is a container.} The idea that \quotation{good
things are up} generates a multitude of metaphors like
\quotation{profits are going up} and \quotation{moving on up,} for
example (Lakoff and Johnson 1980b, 195--98)

\placefigure{\quotation{An exemplary interface for viewing a three
dimensional book} (Card et al. 2006,
3).}{\externalfigure[images/book-metaphor.png]}

In the cognitive view, the metaphor performs a number of
\quotation{conventional mappings from one domain to another} (Lakoff
1998, 239). Lakoff mentions for example the common trope of \quotation{a
state is a person,} implicit in the ideas of \quotation{friendly} and
\quotation{hostile} states (Lakoff 1998, 243). This metaphor implies
that ideas about agency, emotion, and mental life usually attached to
people can be extended to state actors. Similarly, to say that someone
is \quotation{boiling mad,} instantiates the common trope of
\quotation{anger is a hot liquid in a container.} In this case, common
known properties attached to the domain of physics are mapped onto the
domain of emotion. Lakoff further explains that such domain mappings
tend to follow a few rules. They are usually partial and asymmetrical.
\quotation{Mappings are not arbitrary,} he writes, \quotation{but
grounded in the body and in everyday experience and knowledge.} Finally
domain mappings obey what Lakoff calls the Invariance Principle, by
which \quotation{the image schema structure of the source domain is
projected onto the target domain in a way that is consistent with
inherent target domain structure.}\footnote{(Lakoff 1998) See also
  Turner and Fauconnier (1995); Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez (1998); Lakoff
  (2009).}

\subsubsection[another-section]{Another Section}

The principles of metaphor-driven design contain an implicit model of
human--computer interaction, which implies that humans prefer to
manipulate digital information stored on computational media by the
means of familiar mediating structures---paragraphs, pages, files, and
folders---associated figuratively with the affordances of print media.
We know, in other words, what paragraphs, pages, files, and folders can
do on paper and we would like for digital images of paper to behave in a
similar way. For example, one affordance of paper is that it can be
folded. It therefore becomes possible to \quotation{earmark} a page by
folding a corner. The fold enables subsequent recollection of text that
has been previously read. By these means, a reader marks a notable place
in the text in order to return to it later. The digital medium cannot be
folded in the same way as it offers a set of physical affordances that
differ from actual paper. Readers are not familiar with \quotation{what
can be done} digitally, however; consequently, the affordances of
digital media are presented through metaphor. Thus a virtual
\quotation{earmark} on a \quotation{page} represents a numerical pointer
to a specific address in the computer memory. A \quotation{page} stands
for a range of related addresses that correspond roughly to the
information visible on an analogous page in print. Similarly one
\quotation{drops a folder into a trash bin} or \quotation{drags and
drops a file} or \quotation{bookmarks a page} on a screen. Such
metaphors rely on habituated insight with one medium extended into
another. We do not literally \quotation{drag} or \quotation{drop} bits,
but we use metaphors of paper and trashcan to help us manipulate bits
and bytes as if they were household objects. The metaphor opens
figurative possibilities, but it also obscures the actual physical
contingencies of interacting with bits and bytes, logic gates and
magnetic traces.

The affordances of the physical medium differ from those of the
simulated one. We manipulate bits and bytes differently from files and
folders, pages and paragraphs. The metaphorical substitution encourages
readers to extend the facility they have with manipulating one sort of
media (paper and ink) to another (screen and pixels). What readers gain
in facility, they lose in critical faculty. Alienated from the actual
physical structures of information storage and retrieval, readers gain
access to the metaphor alone. Thus we go through the motions of turning
the page but actually redraw the screen. We \quotation{highlight a
passage,} an action that may also send information about the highlighted
passage to a data aggregation service. We \quotation{share a book} which
means really assigning a temporary license to another user. The
structures of governance do not reveal themselves in the metaphor. Where
did the text go? someone asks when downloading a paper from an online
journal.\footnote{The notion of \quotation{digital text} itself is a
  metaphor. Files do not really hold texts. The idea of \quotation{text}
  identifies a segment of stored memory coupled with control codes that
  govern layout and projection in specific material context. Together,
  these diverse signals and physical affordances create the illusion of
  a single text.} It is in your \quotation{home} I answer. But unless
one of us is familiar with the material contingencies of file storage,
neither has a mental map of any physical location corresponding to the
\quotation{home} directory, the default location of personal files on
many systems. When confronted with the actual affordances of digital
text, the user grasps for neutered metaphors. We \quotation{reside} in
such homes, \quotation{own,} \quotation{share,} and \quotation{create}
only in the simulacrum.

Metaphors of human-computer interaction conceal the structure of
computation. Print offers a relatively static and stable medium for
knowledge transmission. Ink and paper do not change in transit. By
contrast, the vessels of computation are capable of altering the content
dynamically. Imagine me asking you to read Shakespeare's {\em Hamlet},
for example, by lending you a copy of the text. In the case of a paper
book, I may be sure that the text in my hands will remain the same as I
pass it into yours. But the computed sign also has the capability to
adjust itself to new contexts. For example, the simulated {\em Hamlet}
may adapt to the new reader's geographic location, mood, or consumption
habits. In fact, most texts we consume today come to us in such
computationally constructed way. The front page of the New York Times
viewed in Beijing will differ from the front page viewed in New York.
The two \quotation{pages} or \quotation{sites} are in some sense two
completely different texts. But in another sense, the \quotation{front
page} identifies the same location of the same text, in two diverging
and dynamically composed versions. They feed off of the same sources.
The same source code gives rise to both texts.

The key to understanding \quotation{the loss of resemblances} that
accompanies ubiquitous simulation lies in the inner dynamics of metaphor
machinery. A functioning metaphor, if you would recall from Lakoff, is
one which ferries the schematic composition of one domain into another.
Thus to say \quotation{life is a stage} is to transpose something about
theater onto life. In literary terms, the theater is \quotation{tenor}
where \quotation{life} is \quotation{vehicle} of the composite figure
(Richards 1936). Simulations work differently. Where the tenor of the
literary metaphor crosses several semantic and cognitive domains, the
computational metaphor substitutes the \quotation{signs of the real for
the real} (Baudrillard 1994, 2). It is a subtle difference that
engenders not-so-subtle effects. For example, it is one thing to say
\quotation{you are the apple of my eye} and quite another to actually
confuse apples for eye pupils. Baudrillard gives us the example of a map
that no longer corresponds to any territory. He calls such a condition
of pure simulation without a referent {\em hyper-reality}. We expect a
digital simulation to attain a measure of correspondence between
representation and the thing being represented. For example, in theory,
a weather simulation should be capable of modeling observed
meteorological conditions. But would it be a weather simulation if the
model was broken in some way, or, in the extreme, if it had no
correspondence to the physics of clouds, wind, and water? The hyper-real
breaks further still by usurping the underlying reality. The model does
not merely obscure, it takes place of the thing being modeled. In other
words, it begins to simulate itself, according to its own rules, similar
only to itself. The simulation no longer corresponds to any situation
\quotation{on the ground.} Severed from its referent, the symbol itself
attains the status of reality. Thus hyper-reality: a symbol that folds
onto itself. It is a weather simulation confused for weather.

We know that physical affordances of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and
magnetic storage differ drastically from those of paper, goat skins, or
parchment. Yet digital surface representation maintains the illusion of
self-similarity. We are faced with what is called {\em skeuomorphic}
design, by which screen reading resembles print. In this way, an
electronic book reader simulates the bent corner of a well-thumbed book.
The skeuomorphic resemblance itself constitutes a metaphor worthy of
critical examination. The principles of skeuomorphic design extend a
visual metaphor from one medium to another. The reader already knows how
to turn pages of a book. A book device therefore simulates pages to ease
the cognitive burden of transitioning from paper to pixel. Instead of
issuing unfamiliar commands to the computer to turn the page, readers
perform the more habituated motion of swiping across the screen. The
gliding motion enacts a kinetic analogy---a type of a
metaphor---transposing properties of paper to glass.

The interface metaphor similarly exchanges one referent for another.
Simulation should, by definition, \quotation{assume a form resembling
that of something else} (“Simulation, N.2” 2015). Metaphor machines
assume the form of one thing, while structuring another. To drag and
drop a document into a trashcan on the screen, for example, should in
theory correspond to an analogous set of data manipulations on the disk.
Yet, \quotation{discarding a file} in this manner does not necessarily
include deletion of data from the storage medium, as expected. The
representation of the document may disappear visually where the
inscription endures. Such \quotation{loss of resemblances} could be
insignificant. Does one care whether a file was actually erased or not
when performing deletion? Perhaps not in many cases. But in some cases,
when it really matters---under the threat of censorship or prosecution,
for example---the incongruence exposes the frailty of our alienation
from the material contexts of digital knowledge production. We want the
thing to stay deeply deleted. Our grasp on the medium weakens the more
convincing the simulacrum.

Readers bear the burden of conceptual transference. In pretending to
turn virtual pages, we lose sight of the mechanisms producing the
simulation. If we hope to practice anything like interpretation or close
reading at the level of discourse, we must certainly also practice them
at the physical site of discourse formation. A truly materialist poetics
would reach beyond representation towards the object. More than
superficial embellishment, the skeuomorphic metaphor enacted at the
surface of the digital literary device structures all meaning-carrying
units: from individual letters, to words, paragraphs, chapters, pages,
and books. We know that there is nothing inherently page-like about
rigid slabs of glass and silicone. The metaphor of \quotation{turning
the page by swiping across the screen} conceals the structural rift
between media.

Why would readers engage in such a charade? Why not simply make use of
novel interfaces afforded by new technology? The literature from the
field of human--computer interaction suggests a formalist answer:
habituation (Carroll and Thomas 1982; Carroll, Mack, and Kellogg 1987;
Spolsky 2001). The initial effort it takes to learn to read in a new
environment may discourage potential readers from adopting a new
technology. Smart designers therefore rely on acculturated practice, the
turning of pages in our case, to minimize the \quotation{friction} of
adoption. Although an \quotation{electronic book reader} contains no
pages as such, it extends the metaphor of pages to electronic reading.
The perceived facility of use comes at a cost of critical engagement.
The structures of governance, like those embedded in a Portable Document
Format, remain for the most part inaccessible to analysis. A digital
poem, a novel, a physician's script, or a legal contract resembles their
paper counterparts to enable familiar actions. But while imitating paper
pages, the reading {\em appliance} also monitors, adjusts, warns, and
controls.

Simulation conceals structuring principles large and small. Some of the
concealed details may remain inconsequential, like the limit on how many
keys can be pressed at once without overwhelming the circuitry of
keyboard when typing. Other concealed details are of paramount
importance, like digital rights management chips and censorship filters.
Electronic books are governed and internalize governing structures in
ways that are often purposefully hidden from the reader. For example,
the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act prohibits the physical
circumvention of copyright protections (Ku 2004; Ginsburg 2005;
Perzanowski 2008; Fry 2009; Von Lohmann 2010). This means that if an
electronic book is encrypted in some way to prevent copyright
infringement, the reader may also be prevented from examining modes of
accessibility, preservation, or freedom of speech embedded into the
device.

The material affordances of text at that bottom-most, meaning-bearing
medium influence all higher-level functions of interpretation.\footnote{For
  example, see Paul Ricoeur writing on the change in media from speaking
  to writing: \quotation{The most obvious change from speaking to
  writing concerns the relation between message and its medium or
  channel. At first glance, it concerns only this relation, but upon
  closer examination, the first alteration irradiates in every
  direction, affecting in decisive manner all the factors and functions}
  (Ricœur 1976, 25).} Still, most available theories of interpretation
build on properties and assumptions attached to print media. For
example, in Hans-Georg Gadamer's seminal conception of art, the free
play of the artistic mind transforms into material structure
({\em Gebilde}) that is both \quotation{repeatable} and
\quotation{permanent} (Gadamer 1975, 110). Similarly, in his
{\em Interpretation Theory}, Paul Ricoeur writes about the
\quotation{range of social and political changes} related to the
invention of writing. For Ricoeur, human discourse is \quotation{fixed}
and thereby \quotation{preserved from destruction} in writing (Ricœur
1976, 26--28). The electronic literary device offers no such permanence.
What is meant by \quotation{fixed,} \quotation{permanent,} and
\quotation{repeatable} changes with the medium. Such properties come to
us under the guise of surface representation, which obscures the flows
of code and codex. Nothing is guaranteed in the passage of electronic
text from one pair of hands into another. Digital formatting expands its
purview far beyond typographical convention. The erasure of words, word
substitution, automatic summarization, wholesale generation of discourse
by algorithmic means---the command and control layer contains all such
possibilities. What does it mean to read and to interpret a dynamic
text, which changes depending on its context? How can literary
analysis---close reading, philology, hermeneutics---persist without the
fixity of print?

Consider the commonplace task of \quotation{turning pages} in the act of
writing or reading digital texts. In cognitive linguistic terms, the
idea of paper pages should somehow extend into the domain of
manipulating digital information. In literary terms, the projection of a
page on the screen carries the tenor of paper pagination. In this way,
the turning of simulated pages implies a certain familiar arrangement of
matter. Readers know what to do with paper pages. They understand their
affordances. The metaphor encourages readers to extend their knowledge
of the physical world into the projected, virtual world. For example,
paper pages can be turned. We know they usually proceed one another,
sequentially. And we are attuned to expect the same attributes to hold
true in the vehicle---the domain receiving the tenor of the metaphor.
The action of turning virtual pages should, in theory, set off a series
of corresponding actions in the target, digital domain. In other words,
turning the page on a screen should correspond to a similar action on
the disk. But the action does not necessarily meet our expectations. The
arrangement of information stored on the disk affords different physical
actions from the arrangement of information on the page. For example, an
English-language character occupies eight bits on a disk where a print
character occupies one. The disk can tolerate millions of rewrites,
where the paper medium wears out after only a few. The paper inscription
is visible to the naked eye where the digital inscription is not.

The simulation is perhaps necessary, because the reading and writing of
digital data can involve processes far outside of everyday experience.
For example, in reading data from solid state (FLASH) memory a circuit
imparts electrical charge through quantum tunneling onto a connected
series of floating gate transistors (Pavan et al. 1997; Bez et al.
2003).

\placefigure{Formal structures at the site of the inscription.
\quotation{Perspective view of a portion of a charge translating device
illustrating a preferred electrical contact arrangement. A quantum of
charge carriers, representing an information bit {[}\ldots{}{]} can be
translated along the semiconductor {[}\ldots{}{]} sweeping the minority
carriers with it. The quantum can be detected by a simple capacitive
couple, e.g., a floating gate FET} (Boyle and Smith
1974).}{\externalfigure[images/floating-gate.png]}

Whatever the complexities of solid state storage architecture, the
difference in arrangement of information between pages and floating
gates---at the root of modern \quotation{sold state} storage---is
apparent. The structure of one has only an arbitrary connection to the
structure of the other. Consequently changes in the structure of one
domain do not necessitate changes in the structure of another: to
\quotation{erase a word} on a projected, virtual page thus may not have
the corresponding effect on the level of the storage medium. The
information may persist despite the intended erasure. As dwellers of
simulated worlds, we hope that the analogy between paper and pixel
achieves a level of verisimilitude. Turning the page or erasing a word
on the screen should do something similar on the disk. However, we also
know that not to be the case. As in Baudrillard's map, the metaphor is
broken in that it no longer reflects any terrain. The computational
metaphor simulates the familiar but absent affordances of the print
artifact. The simulation suggests a structuring of one kind, while
enacting a structure of another.

In these novel conditions, the task of the literary scholar must
include, among other things, a practice of microscopic reading that
corresponds to the kind of micromolecular writing suggested by
Baudrillard and Frederich Kittler (Kittler 1995). The full extent of the
simulated figure must be made available for interpretation. What happens
in the metaphorical transference between the book as a work of art and
the apparatus simulating the book? Estrangement, the exegesis of the
metaphor, reveals mechanisms of governance shaping mental experience. It
apprehends the revealed mechanics of computational reading. Materialist
poetics subsequently allow one to consent, or, conversely, to resist
elements of imposed structure.

\reference[refs]{}%

\reference[ref-aaron_flash_2002]{}%
Aaron, V.-Y., and J. Leburton. 2002. “Flash Memory: Towards
Single-Electronics.” {\em IEEE Potentials} 21 (4): 35--41.
doi:\useURL[url1][https://doi.org/10.1109/MP.2002.1044216][][10.1109/MP.2002.1044216]\from[url1].

\reference[ref-baudrillard_simulacra_1994]{}%
Baudrillard, Jean. 1994. {\em Simulacra and Simulation}. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.

\reference[ref-baudrillard_selected_1988]{}%
Baudrillard, Jean, and Mark Poster. 1988. {\em Selected Writings}.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

\reference[ref-bez_introduction_2003]{}%
Bez, R., E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti. 2003.
“Introduction to Flash Memory.” {\em Proceedings of the IEEE} 91 (4):
489--502.
doi:\useURL[url2][https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2003.811702][][10.1109/JPROC.2003.811702]\from[url2].

\reference[ref-boyle_information_1974]{}%
Boyle, W., and G. Smith. 1974. Information storage devices. US3858232 A,
issued December 1974.
\useURL[url3][http://www.google.com/patents/US3858232]\from[url3].

\reference[ref-card_methods_2006]{}%
Card, Stuart Kent, Richard Carl Gossweiler III, Allison Gyle Woodruff,
and Jock Douglas MacKinlay. 2006. Methods, systems, and computer program
products for the display and operation of virtual three-dimensional
books. US7015910 B2, issued March 2006.
\useURL[url4][http://www.google.com/patents/US7015910]\from[url4].

\reference[ref-carroll_interface_1987]{}%
Carroll, J. M, R. L Mack, and W. A Kellogg. 1987. {\em Interface
Metaphors and User Interface Design}. San Jose {[}etc.{]}: IBM Thomas J.
Watson Research Division.

\reference[ref-carroll_metaphor_1982]{}%
Carroll, J.M., and John C. Thomas. 1982. “Metaphor and the Cognitive
Representation of Computing Systems.” {\em IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man and Cybernetics} 12 (2): 107--16.
doi:\useURL[url5][https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.1982.4308795][][10.1109/TSMC.1982.4308795]\from[url5].

\reference[ref-fry_circumventing_2009]{}%
Fry, David. 2009. “Circumventing Access Controls Under the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act: Analyzing the Securom Debate.” {\em Duke Law
and Technology Review} 2009: 1.
\useURL[url6][http://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/dltr2009&id=65&div=&collection=]\from[url6].

\reference[ref-gadamer_truth_1975]{}%
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. 1975. {\em Truth and Method}. New York: Seabury
Press.

\reference[ref-ginsburg_legal_2005]{}%
Ginsburg, Jane C. 2005. “Legal Protection of Technological Measures
Protecting Works of Authorship: International Obligations and the US
Experience.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 785945. Rochester, NY: Social
Science Research Network.
\useURL[url7][http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=785945]\from[url7].

\reference[ref-jakobson_closing_1960]{}%
Jakobson, Roman. 1960. “Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics.” In
{\em Style in Language}, edited by Thomas A Sebeok, 350--77.
{[}Cambridge: Technology Press of Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

\reference[ref-kittler_there_1995]{}%
Kittler, Friedrich A. 1995. “There Is No Software.” {\em CTHEORY} a032
(October).
\useURL[url8][www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=74]\from[url8].

\reference[ref-ku_critique_2004]{}%
Ku, Vicky. 2004. “Critique of the Digital Millenium Copyright Act's
Exception on Encryption Research: Is the Exemption Too Narrow.”
{\em Yale Journal of Law and Technology} 7: 465.
\useURL[url9][http://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/yjolt7&id=467&div=&collection=]\from[url9].

\reference[ref-lakoff_contemporary_1998]{}%
Lakoff, George. 1998. “The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor.” In
{\em Metaphor and Thought}, edited by Andrew Ortony, 201--52. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

\reference[ref-lakoff_invariance_2009]{}%
---------. 2009. “The Invariance Hypothesis: Is Abstract Reason Based on
Image-Schemas?” {\em Cognitive Linguistics} 1 (1): 39--74.
doi:\useURL[url10][https://doi.org/10.1515/cogl.1990.1.1.39][][10.1515/cogl.1990.1.1.39]\from[url10].

\reference[ref-lakoff_metaphors_1980]{}%
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980a. {\em Metaphors We Live by}.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

\reference[ref-lakoff_metaphorical_1980]{}%
---------. 1980b. “The Metaphorical Structure of the Human Conceptual
System.” {\em Cognitive Science} 4 (2): 195--208.
doi:\useURL[url11][https://doi.org/10.1016/S0364-0213(80)80017-6][][10.1016/S0364-0213(80)80017-6]\from[url11].

\reference[ref-malinowski_problem_1923]{}%
Malinowski, Bronislaw, I. A Richards, F. G Crookshank, and J. P
Postgate. 1923. “The Problem of Meaning in Primitive Languages.” In
{\em The Meaning of Meaning; a Study of the Influence of Language Upon
Thought and of the Science of Symbolism,} edited by C. K Ogden, 146--52.
London; New York: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.; Harcourt, Brace & Co.

\reference[ref-pajak_electronic_1992]{}%
Pajak, Henry G. 1992. Electronic library. EP0472070 A2, issued February
1992.
\useURL[url12][http://www.google.com/patents/EP0472070A2]\from[url12].

\reference[ref-pavan_flash_1997]{}%
Pavan, P., R. Bez, P. Olivo, and E. Zanoni. 1997. “Flash Memory Cells-an
Overview.” {\em Proceedings of the IEEE} 85 (8): 1248--71.
doi:\useURL[url13][https://doi.org/10.1109/5.622505][][10.1109/5.622505]\from[url13].

\reference[ref-perzanowski_rethinking_2008]{}%
Perzanowski, Aaron. 2008. “Rethinking Anticircumvention's
Interoperability Policy.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1224742. Rochester,
NY: Social Science Research Network.
\useURL[url14][http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1224742]\from[url14].

\reference[ref-richards_philosophy_1936]{}%
Richards, I. A. 1936. {\em The Philosophy of Rhetoric}. New York;
London: Oxford University Press.

\reference[ref-ricur_interpretation_1976]{}%
Ricœur, Paul. 1976. {\em Interpretation Theory: Discourse and the
Surplus of Meaning}. Fort Worth: Texas Christian University Press.

\reference[ref-ruiz_de_mendoza_ibanez_nature_1998]{}%
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez, Francisco José. 1998. “On the Nature of Blending
as a Cognitive Phenomenon.” {\em Journal of Pragmatics} 30 (3): 259--74.
doi:\useURL[url15][https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-2166(98)00006-X][][10.1016/S0378-2166(98)00006-X]\from[url15].

\reference[ref-searle_metaphor_1998]{}%
Searle, John R. 1998. “Metaphor.” In {\em Metaphor and Thought}, edited
by Andrew Ortony, 83--112. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

\reference[ref-_simulation_2015]{}%
“Simulation, N.2.” 2015. {\em OED Online}. Oxford University Press.
\useURL[url16][http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/100790]\from[url16].

\reference[ref-spolsky_user_2001]{}%
Spolsky, Joel. 2001. {\em User Interface Design for Programmers}.
Berkeley, CA; New York, NY: Apress.

\reference[ref-turner_death_1987]{}%
Turner, Mark. 1987. {\em Death Is the Mother of Beauty: Mind, Metaphor,
Criticism}. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

\reference[ref-turner_conceptual_1995]{}%
Turner, Mark, and Gilles Fauconnier. 1995. “Conceptual Integration and
Formal Expression.” {\em Metaphor and Symbolic Activity} 10 (3):
183--204.
doi:\useURL[url17][https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327868ms1003_3][][10.1207/s15327868ms1003_3]\from[url17].

\reference[ref-unicode_consortium_unicode_1990]{}%
Unicode Consortium. 1990. “The Unicode Standard: Worldwide Character
Encoding, Version 1.” Addison-Wesley.

\reference[ref-von_lohmann_unintended_2010]{}%
Von Lohmann, Fred. 2010. {\em Unintended Consequences: Twelve Years
Under the DMCA}. Electronic Frontier Foundation.
\useURL[url18][http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED509862]\from[url18].

\placelistofpublications


\stopchapter
\stopcomponent