---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Visualizing Sovereignty: Cartographic Queries for the Digital Age"
  "short": Visualizing Sovereignty
author: 
- name: Yarimar Bonilla
  shortname: Bonilla
- name: Max Hantel
  shortname: Hantel 
link: 
date: May 2016
issue: 1
order: 5
abstract: "This essay asks how visual representations of the postcolonial Caribbean are shaped by, and in turn could reshape, the political imaginary of sovereignty. Describing several different experiments with form—from conventional maps to temporal charts to animation—it argues that visualizing sovereignty is a first step in retheorizing the meaning of sovereignty itself beyond the regulatory limits of insular, nation-state autonomy. The authors call for collaborative efforts to create “prophetic cartographies” attuned to alternative political currents and the possibility of imagining the Caribbean otherwise."
---

The genesis for this project arose during a fit of last-minute teaching
prep for one of the authors. While putting the final touches on a
lecture for a Caribbean Perspectives class, Yarimar struggled with how
to visually represent the political terrain of the Caribbean and
specifically how to convey the predominance of nonsovereign societies in
the region. She wanted to convey that places like Guadeloupe, Curacao,
Puerto Rico, and the Cayman Islands did not constitute exceptions to
Caribbean political history but rather emblematic examples of the
political forms that characterize the region as a whole. When Google
Image proved useless, and with little time to spare before class, she
settled on altering a basic map of the Caribbean by using multicolored
arrows to mark the different societies that were not independent
nation-states. The year was 2010 and the full political effects of the
Haitian earthquake were still unknown, with news emerging that a
supranational body might replace the Haitian government, so before
rushing off to class Yarimar impulsively added a question mark at the
center of the map, representing not just the political uncertainties
faced by one Caribbean society but also the larger question of what
exactly sovereignty has meant for the region as a whole and how one
might seek to visually represent it.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/yarimar-map.png"
            title="Map of the Caribbean"
            caption="Figure 1. Map of the Caribbean created by Yarimar Bonilla in 2010." %}

<!-- ![Map of the Caribbean](/images/issue01/yarimar-map.png "Figure 1. Map of the Caribbean created by Yarimar Bonilla in 2010.") -->


In the years that followed, this initial cartographic impulse has led to
a series of projects that have sought to disrupt how we both *visualize*
and *theorize* Caribbean sovereignty. In this essay we discuss this
trajectory and how it led to the creation of an animated map of the
Caribbean, developed by the two authors, that seeks to foreground the
analytical importance and predominance of nonindependent societies while
also rethinking how sovereignty itself can be imagined, conceptualized,
theorized, and visualized beyond the constraints of Western cartography.

**The Map and the Territory**

Classic political theory has traditionally represented sovereignty as
supreme, absolute, territorially confined, and vertically rooted in the
apparatus of the state. The traditional philosophy of sovereignty,
rooted in the treaty of Westphalia in 1648, poses that national
governments hold supreme authority over their internal affairs and that
other states should not intervene under exception of threat or
obligation of alliance.[^1] Recent scholarship has sought to complicate
this notion by demonstrating the extent to which formally independent
nations (mostly in the global South) have been palpably shaped by
outside interests, supranational organizations, and both internal and
external nongovernmental actors. These scholars have emphasized how
nonstate, trans-state, and suprastate actors (such as the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund, international nongovernmental
organizations, military contractors, lending firms, and others agents)
are increasingly taking up what were long thought to be the privileged
duties of state governments.[^2] The perceived “newness” of these
processes is, however, often overstated. For, as historians of empire
have shown, claims to sovereignty have always been fractured, layered,
negotiated, and contested.[^3]

This is nowhere more evident than in the Caribbean, where the history of
postcolonial sovereignty has unfolded as a story of sovereignty
challenged, contested, disavowed, and undermined. From the moment of
Haiti’s declaration of independence in 1804, Caribbean sovereignty has
been an open question. The political authority of the first black
republic posed a challenge to the international system of states at the
time, requiring the international community to create new protocols for
trade and diplomacy with which to engage Haiti economically while
skirting the political and ontological challenges posed by its
revolution.[^4] Indeed, it was only after Haiti’s economic sovereignty
had been fully undermined through the imposition of crippling debt that
its political sovereignty was nominally recognized. Similarly, Cuba’s
independence in 1898 was conditional on the securing of a permanent
relationship with the United States. In the wake of its war of
independence with Spain, Cuba remained under US military occupation
until 1901, at which point the US-authored Platt Amendment was
incorporated into the Cuban constitution, guaranteeing permanent use of
the Guantanamo military base, authorizing future US interventions, and
barring Cuba from entering into foreign trade with other foreign powers.
In the immediate aftermath of the formation of the United Nations in the
1940s, the Caribbean continued to serve as a site of political
experimentation with the development of alternative formulas of
decolonization that offered limited self-governance, such as the
formation of the Puerto Rican commonwealth, and stratified forms of
inclusion, as with the creation of the French overseas departments. This
period also led to significant exploration with models of federation,
including the short lived West Indies Federation (1958–62).

This history of fractured, uneven, contested, and negotiated sovereignty
continues to shape the region as a whole, and at present the *majority*
of societies in the Caribbean are not independent nation-states but
rather protectorates, territories, departments, and commonwealths ([see table 1]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/issue01/caribbean-sovereignty.pdf)). In addition, the Caribbean also holds a large number of
nonsovereign enclaves: military bases, privately owned islands,
semiautonomous tourist resorts, free-trade zones, tax havens, wildlife
preserves, satellite launching stations, detention centers, penal
colonies, floating data centers, and other spaces of suspended,
subcontracted, usurped, or imposed foreign jurisdiction that challenge
the principles of bounded territorial authority associated with the
Westphalian order. Moreover, even the nominally independent nations of
the Caribbean have repeatedly had their political and economic
sovereignty challenged through military invasions, electoral
interference, security legislation, and the multiple barriers placed on
international trade throughout the global South. As a result,
sovereignty in the Caribbean is best understood as a contested claim and
an imposed ideal rather than an actually existing condition. It is for
this reason that we suggest that the Caribbean is best understood
(borrowing from Antonio Benítez-Rojo) as a *nonsovereign archipelago*,
where patterns of constrained and challenged sovereignty can be said to
repeat themselves.[^5]

However, rather than representing the Caribbean as a site of problematic
sovereignty, we would like to emphasize how Caribbean history brings
into question the notion of sovereignty itself. We believe that
*sovereignty* needs to be understood as part of that family of words
that Michel-Rolph Trouillot describes as “North Atlantic
universals.”[^6] These concepts do not seek to merely describe the world
but to constrain it possibilities. In other words, these are the native
categories of the West, as a project not a place. In describing the
Caribbean as a site of nonsovereignty, we are thus suggesting that it is
not simply a site where “ordinary sovereignty” wanes and fails but also
a fertile site from which to contest, disrupt, and reimagine notions of
sovereignty, autonomy, freedom, liberty, and self-determination beyond
the canon of political theory.[^7]

Cartography plays a constitutive role in this process, as it has
historically reproduced the idea of the sovereign nation-state as a
bounded entity and naturalized it as the site of proper politics.
Geographic histories reveal that the visualizing power of the map
preceded the formation of sovereign states and created the conditions of
possibility for colonial expansion. As Jordan Branch argues, maps
reshaped our perceptions of legitimate political authority and
organization, paving the way for the shift from medieval to modern
political structures.[^8] Of course, this sense of *insular* sovereignty
casts the production of European modernity as an internal, autarkic
shift. Yet, the global power of mapmaking in the production of sovereign
states took hold through colonial circuits of exchange and violence. The
map is “a technology of possession,” as Anne McClintock argues,
“promising that those with the capacity to make such perfect
representations must also have the right of territorial control.”[^9]
Again, the map reifies the truth of what it represents, promising and
delivering virgin lands and nonsovereign territories in need of
discovery, settlement, borders, and territorial authority.

If the philosophical and material projects of modernity and colonialism
took shape through a geographic reordering of sovereignty, our
contemporary moment suggests another emerging shift. Sylvia Wynter
argues that the various imaginaries of decolonization made possible “a
new opening—that of the collective challenge made to . . . symbolic
representational systems,” and hence, the possibility of a “new world
view.”[^10] The crucial question then becomes: What spatiotemporal
models can grasp and even utilize such an opening? The problem, Wynter
suggests, is that much contemporary political and geopolitical theory
“mistakes the map for the territory,” by working within the ideological
coordinates of Eurocentric, Western thought rather than investigating
the historical processes that bequeathed those mores to the
present.[^11] Orienting struggles according to certain maps attends to
representations of political space *as if* these representations
faithfully and transparently described contemporary horizons of
possibility. Yet, the landscape of possibility always exceeds the limits
of representation. Moreover, the map is itself a function of a
foundational set of codes concerning who controls visual representation
and what counts as representable in the first place. Attending to those
codes themselves, rather than to simply the maps they generate,
profoundly disrupts the cartographic gaze and its imposed limits.

One such code, we argue, is the evolutionary discourse of political
development, which produces a naturalized view of the nation-state that
then renders nonindependent and nonsovereign Caribbean islands as
exceptional, paradoxical, and even pathogenic.[^12] Confined to a map of
the properly sovereign Caribbean, those “paradoxical” societies that
articulate freedom without the grammar of national independence, or
those nominally independent countries that fail to achieve bounded
autonomy, are found wanting or inexplicable. If we instead begin our
work from the space between the map and the territory—and the political
processes that render them transferable—it becomes possible to see those
“exceptional” cases as not always already failed but as generative sites
for alternative visions of sovereignty itself.

Wynter’s deployment of the map as the key symbol for this epistemic
mistake is certainly intentional. Cartography spatially produces and
reproduces political-economic arrangements while retroactively
naturalizing them.[^13] Through this visual power, a recursive
relationship develops between the boundary projects of modernity and the
limits of identity and expression, thus reifying the political and
epistemological perspective the map purports to describe. Charles de
Gaulle’s infamous declaration, made upon looking at a transatlantic
map—“Between Europe and America I see only specks of dust”—indexes this
cartographic effect. Edouard Glissant uses this quotation as the
epigraph to *Caribbean Discourse*, making it the point of departure for
reimagining the geographic meaning of the Caribbean and “the future of
small countries.”[^14] Those little bits of dust, he hopes, might help
produce alternative spatiotemporal models of identity and collective
life beyond the fortress island of national sovereignty or the “flat
world” of globalization.[^15]

If the visual representations we use to capture questions of political
sovereignty are inextricably intertwined with how and what we imagine
sovereignty to be, then the question becomes how to visually represent
this process, where the production of space is both the precondition and
the result of imagining sovereignty itself. In some sense, this question
poses a visual correlate to the longstanding concern in Caribbean
thought with the displacement of universal history, such as Glissant’s
experiments with alter-chronologies or Trouillot’s interrogations of
Western historiography. Cartographic experimentation also questions any
neat division between spatial and temporal categories by demonstrating
how the production of space through a “mapping of the present” entails a
specific mode of articulating the past and future.[^16]

Building on these ideas, we thus consider alternative cartographic and
geographic approaches that begin from the tense and tenuous relationship
between the map and the territory and which are grounded in the
specificity of Caribbean political history. Our goal, then, is not
simply to update previous textual or analogue modes of engagement but to
trace and enact their transformation through digital subjectivities and
new cartographic technologies. We thus ask, *What could visual
representations of the Caribbean become if no longer anchored by
political sovereignty as a regulatory ideal of postcolonial independence
or economic development?* Faced with de Gaulle’s dismissal of Caribbean
specks of dust as inferior to the point of irrelevance, Glissant
demanded a “prophetic vision of the past” beyond “schematic chronology”
or “nostalgic lament.”[^17] The Caribbean novelist had to reach into the
past without the teleological comfort of Western history to invent
futures from the traces, the scraps, the cinders of collective memory
and everyday life. While his interlocutors often limit this discussion
to the novel and the word, we take the insistence on vision as a point
of departure: a prophetic cartography of the postcolonial Caribbean.

## Cartographies for the Digital Age

Until now most cartographic representations of the Caribbean have failed
to reveal the complexity of the region’s political topography and how it
challenges normative understandings of political sovereignty. The fact
is that the complexity of the region is difficultly captured through
traditional cartographic forms, which tend to flatten out political
histories. We would like to suggest that through the use of digital
technologies more complex and sophisticated forms of visual
argumentation are increasingly becoming possible. Through the use of
time lapse maps, scholars are able to convey shifts and changes over
time, unsettling our views of contemporary borders and political
relationships. For example, in his project *The Invasion of America: How
the United States Took Over an Eighth of the World*, Claudio Saunt
documents the land cessions through which the United States slowly
expanded Westward, thus showing the slow and violent reduction of Native
homelands into scattered reservations.[^18] In addition to the
time-lapse display, which offers a sense of how this process unfolded,
the website also features an interactive source map that allows users to
see detailed information on how individual cessions were disputed and
challenged, thus offering both a sense of the larger process and
textured detail of its constitutive events.

{% include interactive.html
			type="youtube"
			url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pJxrTzfG2bo"
            img="issue01/invasion-of-america.png"
            title="Invasion of America"
            caption="Invasion of America" %}

<!-- [![Invasion of America](/images/issue01/invasion-of-america.png)](https://www.youtube.com/embed/pJxrTzfG2bo?autoplay=1) -->


Vincent Brown and his team have developed a similarly rich visual argument in his
online animated map *Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761: A Cartographic
Narrative*, in which he documents a previously misunderstood revolt
showcasing the tactical maneuvers made by the rebels. By combining
geographic data on slave uprisings culled from various forms of data
(witness accounts, legal documents, literary texts, and others), he is
able to reveal a spatial logic to slave resistance that was obscured in
colonial accounts, suggesting a greater degree of strategic organization
among insurgents than previously imagined.[^19]

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/brown-revolt.png"
            url="http://revolt.axismaps.com/map/"
            title="Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761: A Cartographic Narrative"
            caption="Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761: A Cartographic Narrative" %}


<!-- [![Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761: A Cartographic Narrative](/images/issue01/brown-revolt.png "Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761: A Cartographic Narrative")](http://revolt.axismaps.com) -->

Brown argues that if we are to take seriously the opportunities afforded
by digital forms of scholarship, we must remain attentive to how
*design* and *interface* constitute modes of scholarly
argumentation.[^20] Whether we engage with the symbolic traditions of
maps, charts, and diagrams or new forms of data visualization, we must
thus think carefully about how representational choices in the use of
color, sound, and format constitute rhetorical strategies. Building on,
rather than abandoning, previous debates about textual representation,
digital scholars must therefore remain attentive to how their narratives
are plotted through the use of various representational formats and
symbolic orders—even as they challenge them. For example, on the website
[*Two Plantations*](http://www.twoplantations.com), produced by Harvard
University’s History Design Studio, the social history of enslaved
families is diagramed through the use of family trees.[^21] The website
shows both the possibilities and the limitations of adopting this
graphic form to, according to Brown, represent the lives of families
whose structures of kinship were violently molded and could never be
based solely on biological descent.[^22] As Brown suggests, even when
they reach their limits these representational experiments can open up
new questions about the most appropriate representational strategies for
the material in question and can generate new questions by uncovering
patterns and revealing challenges that were previously unperceived.

## Mapping the Postcolonial Caribbean

Our own efforts at mapping the Caribbean political landscape have
yielded similar insights. After her initial experiment attempting to
alter pre-existing maps, Yarimar enlisted the help of her research
assistant at the time, Landon Yarrington, to create a map that would
foreground the nonindependent societies of the Caribbean region. The
goal was to visually depict the large number of Caribbean societies
(listed in table 1) that were not independent nation-states and to use
color to portray the diversity of political forms in the region.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/landon-map.jpg"            
            title="Map created by Landon Yarrington in 2011."
            caption="Figure 2. Map created by Landon Yarrington in 2011." %}

<!-- ![Map created by Landon Yarrington in 2011.](/images/issue01/landon-map.jpg "Figure 2. Map created by Landon Yarrington in 2011.") -->


The creation of this map quickly revealed some of the challenges of
depicting the Caribbean in cartographic form. First, choices had to be
made about how to include societies in the Southern continent. Although
politically and historically the coast of South America is often
included in definitions of the region, visually the inclusion of the
South American coast results in a dwarfing of the smaller Caribbean
islands. Given our interest in representing the smaller islands of the
Caribbean, this posed a significant problem. In addition, the presence
of the large landmass of the continent and negative oceanic space had a
similar rhetorical effect to the oft-cited metaphor that the
nonindependent Caribbean represented little more than “specks of dust.”
The first challenge thus became how to fit the story we wished to tell
into the narrative form of the geographic map.

Working with cartographer Jeff Blossom at the Harvard Center for
Geographic analysis, we developed a new map that sought to tackle these
cartographic challenges (see fig. 3). In this map we used an inset to
facilitate the view of the Eastern Caribbean, and we distorted the size
of the ABC islands (Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao), to bring them into
better view. We also erased the continental landmass, portraying only
those South American societies most commonly imagined as part of the
Caribbean (Belize, Guyana, Suriname, and Guiana). Once again, we used
color to visually demarcate political jurisdictions.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/blossom-map.png"            
            title="Map created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015."
            caption="Figure 3. Map created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015." %}

<!-- ![Figure 3. Map created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015.](/images/issue01/blossom-map.png "Figure 3. Map created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015.") -->


Although we played with size and scale, the map retains a sense of
territorial positioning, allowing one to view how political affiliations
are distributed geographically. The erasure of the Southern continent
aids in focusing the eye on the Caribbean societies in question, though
it implicitly reinforces underlying assumptions about the boundaries of
the Caribbean region. This occludes historical and cultural continuities
across the South and Central American region and fails to indicate the
ways places like Panama, Columbia, Venezuela, Mexico, and even Brazil
form part of the framework of the Caribbean.[^23] Moreover, an
understanding of the complex history of the southern Caribbean islands,
and of both the economic and social structures of places like Trinidad
and Curacao, is almost impossible without an understanding of their
close ties to the Latin American coast. These absences are all the more
problematic in the context of an explicitly cartographic interface that
implies a fidelity to the geographic terrain. The southern coast is then
not just absent but visually silenced in this form of representation.
Moreover, the use of the cartographic form to convey an argument that is
not solely or even primarily geographic makes it difficult for the
viewer to comprehend the larger argument about the shifting and
contested nature of political sovereignty.

In order to address these issues we decided to create a temporal map of
the postcolonial Caribbean. More of an infographic than a map, it
features Caribbean societies ordered by the year in which they shifted
away from a colonial status—either by becoming independent or by
entering into a “postcolonial” arrangement with their colonial
centers.[^24]

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/temporal-map.png"            
            title="Temporal map of the postcolonial Caribbean created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015."
            caption="Figure 4. Temporal map of the postcolonial Caribbean created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015." %}

![Figure 4. Temporal map of the postcolonial Caribbean created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015.](/images/issue01/temporal-map.png "Figure 4. Temporal map of the postcolonial Caribbean created by Jeff Blossom and Yarimar Bonilla in 2015.")


Organizationally, the temporal map poses several alternatives to a
traditional map. First, by playing with color and scale, we disrupt the
“realist” effect of traditional geographic maps, making it clear that
the map is not the territory. Second, although we retain the shape and
outline of different Caribbean societies, we render the *scale* of each
island equivalent, thus flattening out the differences in size between
“large” islands like Cuba and Haiti and “small” islands like Martinique
or Dominica. This move dislodges the equation of smallness with
inferiority and the analytical irrelevance usually attributed to those
residing in a “small place.”[^25] In addition, the use of color departs
from the traditional distribution of color on political maps—which
reinforces the idea of bounded states— and instead suggests political
configurations that surpass geographic lines.

The temporal map foregrounds, in other words, what geographer Neil Smith
calls “the production of scale,” demonstrating that debates over scale
express social as much as geographic concerns over boundaries,
locations, and sites of experience.[^26] If scale is constructed, then
not only do different power formations shift scales at different
strategic moments—as, for example, in the reorganization of
nation-states into supranational organizations—but alternative political
imaginaries can also emerge by “jumping scale.”[^27]

Indeed, by shifting scales and placement this visualization makes
visible several patterns. First, at a quick glance one can see that
there were two distinct moments of political independence in the region.
The first is ushered in by the Haitian Revolution in 1804 and culminates
with the Spanish American War in 1898, which led to the granting of
independence to Cuba. This is followed by a period of political
experimentation in which various formulas of inclusion were developed
throughout the French, Dutch, US, and British possessions in the
Caribbean. It is only after 1962 (with the dissolution of the West
Indies Federation) that national sovereignty (now under the auspices of
the United Nations postcolonial sovereignty project) becomes an
imperative once again, but only for some of the former British islands.

Plotting the Caribbean through postcolonial time disrupts traditional
groupings through geography and size (Windward/Leeward, Greater/Lesser
Antilles, etc.) and through linguistic/colonial history (hispanophone,
francophone, etc.). It offers by contrast three distinct groupings that
cut across these traditional boundaries: (1) Caribbean societies that
experienced nineteenth-century nation-building projects, (2) Caribbean
societies that experimented with nonsovereign forms of decolonization,
and (3) Caribbean societies that experienced the postwar decolonization
project. This grouping disrupts traditional arguments about postcolonial
sovereignty in the region—particularly the idea of the
mid-twentieth-century postwar project of decolonization as the norm
against which other exceptions are cast. Now postwar independence
appears as a contingent outcome rather than a naturalized telos or
evolutionary hierarchy.

Of course, our goal here is not to offer a new typology for Caribbean
societies but rather to create *a tool of inquiry*. That is, by
revealing patterns and opening up new questions about those patterns,
images such as these could ideally spur new thinking about political
sovereignty and its shifts over time in relation to a larger set of
questions about what connects or diffracts “the Caribbean” itself as a
cartographic object: physical geography, linguistic groupings,
palimpsestic colonial histories, connections to other regional groupings
like Latin America or the US South, and so forth. In addition, the
suggestion that these images constitute tools of inquiry also implies
that they are not final products, but perpetual works in progress. In
many ways we create these images in order to supersede them as we come
to new understandings and new visions of the processes in question.

In this case, while helpfully bringing into relief alternative ways of
imagining the region, it quickly became evident that the static nature
of the image failed to fully convey the historical processes we sought
to illuminate. By fixing each society at a particular point in time the
image fails to represent the contested and fluctuating nature of these
political arrangements and obscures political configurations that
although temporary are key to understanding the contemporary terrain.
For example, the map in figure 4 does not allow us to represent the
temporary existence of the West Indies Federation, the failure of which
sparked the wave of 1960s independence movements that followed. It also
fails to show that Puerto Rico was an unincorporated US territory since
1917, which suggests that the era of experimentation with formulas of
incorporation began much earlier than what is revealed on the final
graph. Additionally, even as it plots through time, its neat separation
of bounded societies makes it difficult, for instance, to understand the
complications of political sovereignty at the border of Hispaniola and
the ways in which Haiti’s independence is both a condition and a
complication of the Dominican Republic’s. Lastly, the representation of
independent nations as solidly and unwaveringly blue implies that
political independence is a final endpoint and ultimate goal for
Caribbean societies. It wrongly implies that once achieved, national
sovereignty is not perpetually challenged through military occupations
and other forms of political and economic intervention.

In order to better convey these relationships, we recruited the
assistance of a professional animator to set the above image into
motion. The final product retains the effects of the temporal map but
challenges the static effect of the original by allowing us to represent
movement, contingency, temporary arrangements, and the constant
challenges and reorganizations that have characterized the region.[^28]

\[Video. Caption: *Visualizing Sovereignty in the Postcolonial
Caribbean*, 2016; animated video designed by Yarimar Bonilla and Max
Hantel and produced by Kindea Labs.\]

The video begins with a traditional geographic map of the Caribbean but
then releases Caribbean societies from their static positioning in order
to open up the possibility of new organizing principles. Indeed, the
point of departure for the animation is to question how notions of
sovereignty have traditionally ordered our understanding of the
Caribbean and to explore how we might imagine disaggregating and
aggregating the Caribbean differently.

We begin with a colonial grouping based on the various European powers
staking claims in the region at the dawn of the nineteenth century.
Haiti’s independence in 1804 then ushers in the postcolonial Caribbean,
spurring the movement of each island from their colonial grouping to a
charted date when their “postcolonial sovereignty” qualitatively shifts.
Although the end point is visually similar to the temporal map, the
animated video presents these as an uneven and nonlinear process rather
than as a finalized outcome. Indeed, during the collaboration with the
animators, we realized how projecting the final frame in advance—as a
predetermined outcome for the video—ended up constraining the questions
we could visually pose. Once we gave up on knowing with certainty where
each movement might lead, or even which events properly counted as
“relevant,” the animation became a much messier and sometimes difficult
process of bricolage—closely resembling the twists and turns of
postcolonial sovereignty.

Polities now move within and between different statuses, not only
vis-à-vis colonial arrangements (i.e., from Spanish to US control) but
relative to other postcolonial nations. Take, for instance, the
Dominican Republic, which initially appears on the chart as part of a
unified Hispaniola in 1822. It wins independence from Haiti in 1844, now
visually represented as a separate blue territory. Already, a more
complex view of the Dominican Republic’s relationship to sovereignty
emerges as their formal independence is simultaneously conditioned by
the Haitian revolution and generated in opposition to it. Today, the
Dominican Republic’s national celebration of independence day takes
place on 27 February, marking independence *from Haiti*. The animation
points to, moreover, the short period of Spanish restoration when Spain
re-annexed the Dominican Republic in 1861 only to retreat again in 1865
after a two-year war with rebels. A finalized map of the postcolonial
Caribbean might omit this brief interlude because it failed to
retroactively alter the formal event of independence in the Dominican
Republic. However, by insisting on the unevenness and contingency of
sovereign territoriality, the animation helps mark the constitutive
importance of the War of Restoration (a decolonial struggle in which
Haitians and Dominicans fought alongside one another) in the historical
emergence of a divisible Hispaniola and the seemingly antagonistic
political imaginaries dividing it.[^29]

Along those lines, the video brings into relief a finer set of
gradations of postcolonial sovereignty that remain at the center of many
contemporary political challenges in the Caribbean today. The creation
in 1954, for example, of the Netherlands Antilles as one administrative
unit in the Kingdom of Netherlands groups together almost the entirety
of the Dutch Caribbean, excepting Suriname. This initial mode of
organization sets the stage not only for Suriname’s eventual
independence in 1975 but for internal conflicts and struggles for
autonomy *within* the Dutch Caribbean. Aruba breaks away in 1986,
winning autonomy from the Netherlands Antilles but remaining a country
within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Although some of these struggles
were initially articulated in the terms of eventual independence, Aruba
has maintained its autonomous status while the Netherlands Antilles was
dismantled in 2010, reopening the question of sovereignty in the Dutch
Caribbean. Thus, with the animation, we hope to show the triangulated
relationship between historical colonial groupings (i.e., the Dutch
versus the Spanish) and postcolonial modes of organization (i.e., the
Netherlands Antilles) in the emergence of contemporary conditions of
nonsovereignty.

Second, the video also takes stock of temporary arrangements, fleeting
revolutions, and alternative modes of governance to acknowledge not only
the legacies of colonial rule but the ongoing experiments with
postcolonial transformation. Most notable is the period of the West
Indies Federation from 1958 to 1962, both for how it regrouped the
collective spatial politics of the Caribbean and for how its eventual
dissolution shaped the trajectories (toward independence or otherwise)
of its constituent states. Similarly, at the scale of specific islands,
revolutionary movements challenged the meaning of independence and the
partial nature of sovereignty under capitalism. The New Jewel movement
in Grenada led by Maurice Bishop took power from 1979 to 1983, for
instance, and the 26th of July movement in Cuba led by Fidel Castro took
control in 1959, inaugurating the period of the Cuban Revolution still
in effect today.

Of course, the temporal difference between the longevity of those two
revolutionary moments in Grenada and Cuba, respectively, did not occur
naturally. The third characteristic of the animated video is the way it
highlights the importance of foreign military interventions in the
formation and denial of postcolonial sovereignty. The US invasion and
occupation of Grenada in 1983 deposed the New Jewel movement government.
On the other hand, US incursions on Cuban sovereignty, such as the Bay
of Pigs invasion, infamously failed, although it remains to be seen how
the recent restoration of diplomatic relations between the United States
and Cuba will effect the revolutionary government. Tracking military
invasions, moreover, points to the emergence of the United States as a
colonial power after the Spanish-American War in 1898, powerfully
represented by both the acquisition of Puerto Rico and the US Virgin
Islands, as well as the stubborn green dot staining the blue of
independent Cuba: Guantanamo Bay.

Fourth and finally, the animation ends up moving toward a
nonchronological plotting of time in which the dates of independence and
post-colonial status spatially represent the inextricably woven nature
of sovereignty as a regulatory ideal, a discursive formation, a
historical imaginary, and a material experience. In 2003, for instance,
St. Barthélemy and St. Martin emerge out of Guadeloupe and the powerful
historical shadow of 1946. By keeping them spatially adjacent, the video
holds in tension the continued importance of 1946 to the sense of
citizenship in the French Caribbean with contemporary struggles for
other modes of recognition and collectivity. Perhaps most clearly, the
animation returns us to Haiti, the inaugurating country on the chart of
the postcolonial Caribbean. Now, next to the constitutive date of 1804,
a United Nations flag rests uneasily to mark the international
peacekeeping mission that began in 2004 after the ousting of
Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Haitian sovereignty and self-determination,
ideals borne in the first black republic out of the profound power of
the Haitian Revolution, thus remain subject to humanitarian occupation.
After the tragic earthquake in 2010, for instance, the United States
claimed control of Haitian airspace and airports, causing diplomatic
fights with other countries involved in the United Nations mission,
“exposing a brewing power struggle amid the global relief effort.”[^30]
In the haunting overlay of 1804 and 2004, it becomes clear that the
political plotting of time slips away from the control of linear
narrative and historical mastery.

## Toward a Prophetic Cartography

Despite our best efforts to create complex representations of the
political landscape in the Caribbean, we repeatedly ran up against the
problem of the reifying nature of Western cartography itself and the
ways it reproduces normative understandings of political sovereignty. In
both the static and the animated versions of our map, independence is
still represented as a solid and equivalent state. This flattens out
different histories of political independence, such as the experiences
and implications of independence through violent struggle versus
political agreement, and routine impingements on sovereignty by
international actors, such as the International Monetary Fund. This
limitation indexes the fundamental challenge to a cartographic endeavor
in which the complexity and connectivity of the region continually
outstrips the frames we use to make it intelligible. The political work
of representation must account for inevitable omissions: the formation
of the Panama Canal, for instance, or the fall of the Soviet Union go
unmarked in the video, although each event could help tell the story of
the postcolonial Caribbean. Indeed, the very act of naming something an
event and committing it to the map entails a political decision. For
example, we debated whether to include the emerging rapprochement
between the United States and Cuba promised by the reopening of the US
Embassy in Havana: What might a new era in US-Cuban relations mean for a
mapping of the present and future horizons of the region? The recursive
quality of these challenges suggest that the visualizations above, no
matter how capacious they become, do not necessarily help us reimagine
what sovereignty represents for Caribbean populations and how it is
experienced differently across space and time.

After producing these visual tools, we are thus still left with a
lingering question: How can we represent sovereignty as a historically
contingent *claim* and culturally specific *value* rather than an
ontological reality? That is, how do we not just visualize sovereignty
but use visualizations to retheorize the meaning of sovereignty itself?

We believe that the first step in this process would involve unbundling
the relationships that have been variously signified as the constituent
components of political sovereignty. As scholars such as Lauren Benton
have shown, sovereignty needs to be theorized as a “divisible quality,”
that encompasses a broad set of relationships applied in various
configurations across place and time.[^31] Secondly, we must examine how
sovereignty operates as a native category. Previous research has
revealed that the concrete elements local populations associate with
sovereignty, autonomy, and self-determination do not always align with
how these values are defined by political theorists and policy experts.
In her previous research about Guadeloupe, Yarimar found that local
activists viewed the search for sovereignty not as the attainment of
nation-state status but as the ability to exert control over elements
that impacted daily life, such as the consumption of locally produced
food, the availability of local employment opportunities (as opposed to
having to migrate for work), increases in minimum wage and “purchasing
power,” the use of vernacular language, attention to silenced histories
of resistance, and the promotion of local arts and media.[^32] Third, we
must develop alternative spatiotemporal models based on these
reexaminations of sovereignty and specific, local negotiations of
nationalism and globalization. The nonsovereign archipelago suggested
earlier is one such possibility. In his work on political ecology in New
Orleans and the Greater Caribbean, Max considers other possibilities
from Afro-Caribbean thought that traverse the boundaries and scalar
fixes of sovereign imaginaries, drawing together distinct bodies and
landscapes without annihilating their difference.[^33]

Caribbean populations have long produced ideas of sovereignty, autonomy,
self-determination, freedom, and liberty that are not properly captured
by either the textual or the visual language of the international system
of states. These nonsovereign projects push against the limits of what
is conceivable under our current visual and conceptual repertoire. We
believe that new kinds of speculative visualizations—employing both
scholarly and artistic methods and practices—might help propel these
projects by giving shape and form to an otherwise inchoate search for
political alternatives. In other words, by creating new representations
of Caribbean sovereignty—what, borrowing from Glissant, we describe as
prophetic cartographies—new political visions for the region might
become more readily imaginable. At a time when many across the region
and beyond feel a profound disenchantment with the project of
nation-state sovereignty, these new visions might help us become more
attuned to alternative political forms that are not currently visible or
fully imaginable.

## Acknowledgements

Support for this project was provided by the National Science
Foundation, the Rutgers School of Arts and Sciences, Rutgers Department
of Latino and Caribbean Studies, Rutgers Advanced Institute for Critical
Caribbean Studies, the Center for the Study of Social Difference at
Columbia University, the Gender Research Institute at Dartmouth College,
and the History Design Studio at Harvard University. For their
assistance at various stages of this project, we would like to thank
Landon Yarrington, Jonna Yarrington, Enmanuel Martinez, Catalina
Martínez Sarmiento, Louis Philippe Römer, and Mario Mercado Diaz. For
their advice and feedback on various drafts and versions, we would like
to thank Vincent Brown, Glenda Carpio, the members of the Multimedia
History and Literature seminar at the Charles Warren Center for Studies
in American History at Harvard University, the participants in the
Rutgers Advanced Institute for Critical Caribbean Studies seminar at
Rutgers University, and the comrades of the Digital Black Atlantic
Project working group at Columbia University.

---

[^1]: See Robert Jackson, *Sovereignty: The Evolution of an Idea*
    (Cambridge: Polity, 2007).

[^2]: See Arjun Appadurai, “Sovereignty without Territoriality: Notes
    for a Postnational Geography,” in Patricia Yaeger, ed., *The
    Geography of Identity* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
    1996), 40–58; Wendy Brown, *Walled States, Waning Sovereignty* (New
    York: Zone Books, 2010); John L. Comaroff and Jean Comaroff,
    “Reflections on the Anthropology of Law, Governance, and
    Sovereignty,” in Franz von Benda-Beckmann et al., eds., *Rules of
    Law and Laws of Ruling: On the Governance of Law* (Surrey, UK:
    Ashgate, 2009), 31–60; James Ferguson, *Global Shadows: Africa in
    the Neoliberal World Order* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
    2006); Thomas Blom Hansen and Finn Stepputat, “Sovereignty
    Revisited,” *Annual Review of Anthropology* 35 (2006): 295–315;
    Thomas Blom Hansen, *Sovereign Bodies: Citizens, Migrants, and
    States in the Postcolonial World* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press, 2005); Carolyn Nordstrom, “Shadows and
    Sovereigns,” *Theory, Culture, and Society* 17, no. 4 (2000): 35–54;
    and Aihwa Ong, *Neoliberalism as Exception: Mutations in Citizenship
    and Sovereignty* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006).

[^3]: See Lauren A. Benton, *A Search for Sovereignty: Law and Geography
    in European Empires, 1400–1900* (Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, 2010); Jack P. Greene, *Negotiated Authorities: Essays in
    Colonial Political and Constitutional History* (Charlottesville:
    University Press of Virginia, 1994); and Philip J. Stern, *The
    Company-State: Corporate Sovereignty and the Early Modern
    Foundations of the British Empire in India* (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2012).

[^4]: See Michel-Rolph Trouillot, *Silencing the Past: Power and the
    Production of History* (Boston: Beacon, 1995); and Julia Gaffield,
    *Haitian Connections in the Atlantic World: Recognition after
    Revolution* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2015).

[^5]: Antonio Benìtez-Rojo, *The Repeating Island: The Caribbean and the
    Postmodern Perspective* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996),
    2.  

[^6]: Michel-Rolph Trouillot, “North Atlantic Universals: Analytical
    Fictions, 1942–1945,” *South Atlantic Quarterly* 101, no. 4 (2002):
    848.

[^7]: Yarimar Bonilla, “Ordinary Sovereignty,” *Small Axe*, no. 42
    (November 2013): 152–65.

[^8]: Jordan Branch, “Mapping the Sovereign State: Technology,
    Authority, and Systemic Change,” *International Organization* 65,
    no. 1 (2011): 2; see also Philip E. Steinberg, “Insularity,
    Sovereignty, and Statehood: The Representation of Islands on
    Portolan Charts and the Construction of the Territorial State,”
    *Geografiska Annaler* 87, no. 4 (2005): 2.

[^9]: Anne McClintock, *Imperial Leather: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in
    the Colonial Contest* (New York: Routledge, 1995), 28.

[^10]: Sylvia Wynter, “1492: A New World View,” in Vera Lawrence Hyatt
    and Rex Nettleford, eds., *Race, Discourse, and the Origin of the
    Americas* (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1995), 50.

[^11]: See Sylvia Wynter, “On How We Mistook the Map for the Territory,
    and Re-Imprisoned Ourselves in Our Unbearable Wrongness of Being, of
    Desetre: Black Studies Toward the Human Project,” in Lewis R. Gordon
    and Jane Anna Gordon, eds., *Not Only the Master’s Tools:
    African-American Studies in Theory and Practice*, (Boulder, CO:
    Paradigm, 2006), 107–69.

[^12]: See Yarimar Bonilla, *Non-sovereign Futures: French Caribbean
    Politics in the Wake of Disenchantment* (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2015).

[^13]: John Pickles, *A History of Spaces: Cartographic Reason, Mapping,
    and the Geo-Coded World* (New York: Routledge, 2003); for a
    discussion of mapping and the “social reproduction of space” in
    Caribbean political formations, see Michaeline Crichlow and Patricia
    Northover, *Globalization and the Post-creole Imagination: Notes on
    Fleeing the Plantation* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009),
    15–41.

[^14]: Edouard Glissant, *Caribbean Discourse: Selected Essays*, trans.
    J. Michael Dash (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia,
    1989), 3; originally published as *Le discours antillais* (1981;
    repr., Paris: Gallimard, 1997).

[^15]: Max Hantel, “Rhizomes and the Space of Translation: On Edouard
    Glissant’s Spiral Retelling,” *Small Axe*, no. 42 (November 2013):
    100–12.

[^16]: Crichlow and Northover, *Globalization and the Post-creole
    Imagination*, 22–23.

[^17]: Glissant, *Caribbean Discourse*, 64.

[^18]: Claudio Saunt, *Invasion of America: How the United States Took
    Over an Eighth of the World*, video, 1:27, published 2 June 2014 by
    eHistory.org, youtu.be/pJxrTzfG2bo. For an interactive map, see
    invasionofamerica.ehistory.org.

[^19]: Vincent Brown, *Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761: A
    Cartographic Narrative*, revolt.axismaps.com. See also Vincent
    Brown, “Mapping a Slave Revolt: Visualizing Spatial History through
    the Archives of Slavery,” *Social Text*, no. 125 (December 2015):
    134–41.

[^20]: Vincent Brown, “Narrative Interface for New Media History: Slave
    Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761,” *American Historical Review* 121, no.
    1 (2016): 176–86.

[^21]: *Two Plantations: Enslaved Families in Virginia and Jamaica*,
    www.twoplantations.com.

[^22]: Brown, “Narrative Interface,” 178.

[^23]: See Edouard Glissant, “Creolization in the Making of the
    Americas,” *Caribbean Quarterly* 54, nos. 1–2 (2008): 81–89; and
    Roman de la Campa, *Latin Americanism* (Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota Press, 1999).

[^24]: For most societies, we chose the date they were removed from the
    United Nations list of non-self-governing societies; for those that
    remain on the list, we chose the date they obtained the status they
    have today. We understand these arrangements as “postcolonial,” not
    in the sense of a formal rupture with colonialism but in terms of a
    shift in how empire and colonialism itself figure in the political
    imagination.

[^25]: As Jamaica Kincaid suggests, “The people in a small place cannot
    see themselves in a larger picture, they cannot see that they might
    be part of a chain of something, anything.” Jamaica Kincaid, *A
    Small Place* (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2000), 52.

[^26]: Neil Smith, *Uneven Development: Nature, Capital, and the
    Production of Space* (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2008),
    229.

[^27]: Neil Smith, “Homeless/Global: Scaling Places,” in Jon Bird et
    al., eds., *Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change*
    (London: Routledge, 1993), 90.

[^28]: **&lt;URL to video&gt;**

[^29]: See Pedro L. San Miguel, *The Imagined Island: History, Identity,
    and Utopia in Hispaniola* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2006).

[^30]: Rory Carroll and Daniel Nasaw, “US Accused of Annexing Airport as
    Squabbling Hinders Aid Effort in Haiti,” *Guardian* (UK), January
    2010,
    www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/17/us-accused-aid-effort-haiti.

[^31]: Benton, *Search for Sovereignty*, specifically chap. 5,
    “Landlocked: Colonial Enclaves and the Problem of
    Quasi-Sovereignty,” 222–78.

[^32]: See Bonilla, *Non-sovereign Futures*.

[^33]: See Max Hantel, “Errant Notes on a Caribbean Rhizome,” *Rhizomes:
    Cultural Studies in Emerging Knowledge* 24 (2012),
    www.rhizomes.net/issue24/hantel.html; “Intergenerational Geographies
    of Race and Gender: Tracing the Confluence of Afro-Caribbean and
    Feminist Thought beyond the Word of Man” (PhD diss., Rutgers
    University, New Brunswick, NJ, 2015).
