---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "\"Who Stole the Soul?\" Rhythm and Race in the Digital Age"
  "short": "Who Stole the Soul?"
author: 
- name: Martin Munro
  shortname: Munro
link: 
date: May 2016
issue: 1
order: 3
abstract: "This essay asks the following basic questions: What happens to the relationship between rhythm and race in the digital age? What happens when mastery of rhythm is no longer necessarily tied to ritual, to manual drumming, and to the physical, bodily re-creation of rhythm? When electronic and digital media give virtually anyone the ability to “drum” and to create rhythmic music, what happens to the longstanding association between blackness and rhythm? Referring to David Scott’s recent arguments on a stalled, tragic time in the Caribbean in particular, the author draws connections between the apparent redundancy of revolutionary, anticolonial thinking in the present and the perhaps less apparent decoupling of rhythm and race in contemporary musical styles. If, as Scott says, the teleologies of anticolonial politics no longer hold true, has rhythm as a marker of time, and as an integral element in the poetics of resistance, lost its association with radical blackness and become a deracialized, dehistoricized commodity?"
---


This essay asks the following basic questions: What happens to the
relationship between rhythm and race in the digital age? What happens
when the production of rhythmic sounds is no longer necessarily tied to
ritual, to manual drumming, and to the physical, bodily re-creation of
rhythm? When electronic and digital media allow virtually anyone the
ability to “drum” and to create rhythmic music, what happens to the
longstanding association between blackness and rhythm? Referring
ultimately to David Scott’s recent arguments on a stalled, tragic time
in the Caribbean in particular, I draw connections between the apparent
redundancy of revolutionary, anticolonial thinking in the present and
the perhaps less apparent decoupling of rhythm and race in contemporary
musical styles. If, as Scott says, the teleologies of anticolonial
politics no longer hold true, has rhythm, as a marker of time and an
integral element in the poetics of resistance, lost its association with
radical blackness and become a deracialized, dehistoricized commodity?

The title of this essay refers, of course, to the 1989 Public Enemy
track that rails against the musical industry’s exploitation of black
artists, from Wilson Pickett to James Brown and Otis Redding. Stealing
the soul, in this case, relates to both financial misdeeds and the
appropriation of “soul” itself by the system, which plays the role of
the “pimp.” Although there appears to be no direct connection between
the two, I had always related this track to Nelson George’s *The Death
of Rhythm and Blues*, which was published one year previously and which
similarly critiques the ways the music business has progressively eroded
and appropriated the concept of soul.[^1] It is George’s text that I
will draw on first in order to lay out some of the rhythm-related issues
that interest me here.

Specifically, I refer most directly to George’s sixth chapter, titled
“Crossover: The Death of Rhythm and Blues (1975–79).” *Crossover* is the
key term here, since it denotes a process of cultural and social
transference, a movement for some across the “barricades” around which,
George says, rhythm and blues music had been formed.[^2] Socially, by
the mid-1970s, a degree of integration and upward mobility had become
possible through civil-service jobs, low- and middle-level management
positions, and increased college attendance. These factors, George says,
“affected the pocketbooks and tastes of black America,” and he laments
this process, arguing that “much of what had made the R&B world work was
lost, perhaps some of it forever”: “Sadly, R&B as a metaphor and a
music, looked like a terminal case; the world that had supported it no
longer existed. The connections between blacks of all classes were
loosening, as various forms of material success (or the illusion of such
success) seduced many into the crossover mentality.”[^3]

Musically, it was disco and what George terms its “rigid rhythms” that
characterized crossover and announced the apparent death of R&B. These
rhythms came not from the R&B tradition that George venerates but from
Eurodisco, whose “metronomelike beat” he derides as being “perfect for
folks with no sense of rhythm.”[^4] Crossover artists such as Billy Paul
and the Stylistics made what George terms “glossy, upwardly mobile
corporate black music,” which tended to underplay the rootsy, rhythmic
elements of R&B and “to be sweet, highly melodic, and
unthreatening.”[^5] This is crucial, in that George relates the advent
of Eurodisco’s machine-produced rhythms to the coming to prominence of
melody in crossover music and the loss of the apparently unshakable bond
between blackness and rhythm. In effect, the history of Eurodisco is
intimately connected to that of the drum machine and to the automated
beats and mechanical rhythms that George sees as the major causes of the
death of R&B.[^6] My point at this stage is not so much to endorse or
refute George’s views but to use them as an instance in which the
rhythms of electronic music seem to both instantiate and echo a crisis
in black identity, understood at least in part in terms of its long
relationship to rhythm.

The musicologist Anne Danielsen raises a question similar to those posed
by this essay when she asks, “What happened to the sound and rhythm of
African-American derived, groove-directed popular music styles when
these grooves began to be produced and played by machines?” She
challenges the assumptions that “groove depends on human performativity
to be aesthetically satisfying” and that “machine-generated music must
be necessarily devoid of groove qualities, because it typically lacks
the microtemporal variation added by people in performance.” She cites
two trends in “computer-based rhythmic music” that challenge these
assumptions: first, the increasing experimentation and manipulation of
the microtiming of “rhythmic events” in digital music, a development she
sees particularly in “African-American dominated genres such as rap,
neo-soul, and contemporary r&b, where the use of digital equipment for
music production was quickly accepted and cleverly applied.”[^7] The
second trend constitutes a challenge to the idea that a successful
“groove” requires microtemporal deviations in order to succeed. In
apparently rigid digital electronica-related styles, she finds still
that the music is danceable and has “unmistakable groove qualities.”[^8]
Digital music, she says, poses a challenge to the rhythm researcher in
explaining the rhythmic qualities of music “whose rhythmic events lie
rigidly on a metric grid.” Importantly, she argues that this challenge
applies not only to “the hyperquantized grooves of our digital age” but
also to earlier forms that are characterized by a “strictly metronomic
organization of rhythmic events, such as disco.”[^9] Her analyses are
related more to the technical qualities of music than the discourse
around rhythm and race that is this article’s primary interest, but her
conclusions do echo those that the article will ultimately arrive at, in
that, as she argues, implicitly critiquing George’s position, the common
assumptions regarding the diminished “soul” of black music in the
digital era do not hold firm. As she puts it, “The grooviness and
expressivity of African-American-derived musical styles did not die with
the new technology. Rather, they were reproduced and transformed.”[^10]

In the Caribbean, the relationship between blackness and rhythm dates to
the early plantation period, when, with the arrival of African slaves,
the colonies became places of encounter between what Jacqueline Rosemain
calls the ancient “cosmogonic rhythms” of Europe and Africa—between the
pagan rhythms that were appropriated by European Christianity and the
animist rhythms of the Africans. On the plantation there was something
of a “crusade against rhythm.”[^11] All rhythms of European or African
origin were subject to antirhythmic legislation: because they were seen
as savage and dangerous and because they accompanied the dances of cults
not recognized by the official religion, they were prohibited. These
prohibitions applied equally to the pagan rhythms of the European folk
as to the rhythms of African rituals.

It was with the arrival en masse of millions of Africans (speaking many
different languages and with their own diverse cultural traditions) that
the notion of distinct black and white cultures began to solidify into
the dualistic models that we are still living with today. This process
of racial and cultural differentiation, shaped and supported by the
racial thinking of European philosophers such as Hegel and de Gobineau,
came to attribute rhythmic music and dance exclusively to Africans and
to the state of savage, premodern humanity that the Africans were
supposed to exemplify. The Africans had brought with them a particular
affinity to rhythm, which was never biologically inherited but was an
acquired aspect of music and everyday life, social interaction, speech,
recreation, and work.[^12] These rhythms clashed with the industrial
rhythms of the plantation system, the unnatural, dehumanizing,
profit-driven cycles of work that radically interrupted natural rhythms
of life, birth, and death. African rhythms adapted themselves to this
alienating environment, in the antiphonal work songs that accompanied
field labor and in the slave dances that were sometimes sacred,
sometimes secular gatherings that purged to some extent the suffering
endured in working to the machine-like rhythms of the plantation. Across
the Caribbean, too, vernacular culture—dances, music, religion,
storytelling, language—acted as a repository of rhythm; and as the
three-tiered social structure typical of Creole societies developed, the
brown-skinned middle class, often as much as the white elite, distanced
itself from rhythm and “black culture” in general.

Rhythm therefore became associated not only with a certain “race” of
people but also with the lower class and with notions of cultural
backwardness. As such, especially in the Caribbean, middle class
intellectuals of color often aligned themselves with the putatively
superior, arrhythmic literary and musical culture of Europe. In the
nineteenth century, with a few exceptions, rhythm remained for many
mulatto intellectuals a marker of Africa, and thus of social and
cultural inferiority. The poetry and art music of this period rarely
evoked rhythmic, vernacular culture in anything but derogatory,
disdainful terms. At the same time, rhythm has been a primary means
through which lower class Caribbean and New World black peoples have
asserted and enacted their historical and political agency.

As the twentieth century began, and as various Pan-African movements
gathered momentum, rhythm was slowly recuperated into the emerging
middle-class, nationalist consciousness as a potent sign of racial
difference and a primary element of the lost, devalorized parts of
national culture. The terms in which rhythm was now evoked—as something
irrevocably premodern, primitive, and antirational—were virtually the
same as before, but now these qualities were seen positively as means of
uniting separated diasporic peoples and of further solidifying the
notion of black culture as radically, incontrovertibly different from
white culture. Rhythm now flooded into all areas of middle-class,
mulatto culture and became for the first time a prominent,
distinguishing feature of poetry, art, music, and choreography.
“Primitive sources” were now raided in the quest to recast national
culture in primordial, anti-European (and often anticolonial) terms. The
putatively authentic culture of the previously neglected masses was now
seen as the single most important marker of national difference, a
great, supposedly uncorrupted resource to be plundered and appropriated
as the middle class slowly shed its mimetic impulses and embraced
cultural nationalism. In the great political, cultural, and social
maelstroms of the New World in the twentieth century, rhythm was thrown
center stage and played a dynamic role in, for instance, Haitian
indigenism, Negritude, and Black Power—movements that harnessed rhythm
to their notions of black culture and black difference. In a 1961
interview, Aimé Césaire was asked about the importance of language in
his work, and he replied that words were less important to him than
rhythm; rhythm, he said, was “an essential element of the black
man.”[^13] Much later, Antonio Benítez-Rojo wrote of the rhythmic
culture of the Caribbean, albeit in less essentialist terms, citing the
importance of African rhythms to the region’s cultures: “Black Africa
has an even greater dependence on rhythm \[than India\]. . . . In
reality, it can be said that African culture’s genes have been codified
according to the possibilities of percussion. African culture is, above
all, a thicket of systems of percussive signifiers, to whose rhythms and
registers one lives both socially and inwardly.”[^14]

The Negritude movement allowed for—indeed, largely relied on—the
elaboration of dualistic, racialized notions of culture, in which rhythm
was recuperated as a marker of Pan-African blackness. Negritude did not,
however, lead to political independence for the French Caribbean
territories, and, as such, rhythm was not subsequently incorporated into
a triumphalist idea of national culture and blackness. Instead, the
notion that there existed a natural bond between black peoples and
rhythm was quickly rejected and subjected to the piercing post-Negritude
critiques of Frantz Fanon and René Ménil, which effectively cut short
the essentialist discourse on blackness and rhythm and cleared the
intellectual ground for a less racially oriented, more
phenomenologically based engagement with rhythm. Edouard Glissant
radically undermines the idea that the rhythm of the drum carries
comforting memories of Africa and uses repetitive, rhythmic structures
as means of working around and toward history, of sounding the past and
trying to decode its meanings through listening to its continued
reverberations in the present. The novelist Daniel Maximin in turn uses
Glissantian techniques in his investigation of circum-Caribbean history.
Rhythms and repetitions are at once integral elements of narrative
structure and also cultural tropes that unite the Caribbean with the
broader New World and in particular the great musical traditions of
North America.[^15]

Perhaps Maximin’s interest in and affinity with African American
experience is in part due to the fact that in the United States, as in
the French Caribbean, black nationalism did not lead to political
independence, and that US black culture has had to negotiate its terms
and its place vis-à-vis a politically and economically dominant white
establishment. At the same time, however, since the early twentieth
century, African American music has benefited from worldwide exposure
and corporate backing in ways that music from other New World sites has
not. When James Brown turned decisively to rhythm in the mid-1960s, the
repercussions of that move were always going to be more significant than
those of the similar rhythmic turns in the other places. Although black
nationalists such as Amiri Baraka sought to racialize Brown’s rhythms
and limit their possible meanings, the rhythms of seminal tracks such as
“Cold Sweat” and “The Payback” escaped this potential prison and spread
across the globe—to Africa, where they were enthusiastically greeted as
new creations, and to Europe, where everyday Europeans began to
rediscover the exhilaration of finding the beat and getting with “the
One.”[^16] This process of rhythmic globalization had actually begun in
the 1920s, with the spread of swing, boogie-woogie, and other forms of
African American music. The global proliferation of rhythm—so often
viewed as a marker of cultural primitivism—has paradoxically coincided
with the expansion of modernity, urbanization, and industrial
development.[^17] In a sense, too, the history of popular music from the
1960s to the present has seen the partial deracialization of rhythm,
particularly since the late 1980s and the emergence of hybrid forms of
dance music such as Chicago house and its various offshoots.[^18]

In the classic colonial situation of twentieth-century Trinidad,
rhythmic popular culture was under constant attack from the white
establishment, particularly the Protestant British. Carnival became the
focus of dualistic debates over culture and rhythm, and throughout the
nineteenth century the colonial authorities systematically repressed the
rhythmic music of the masses. Slowly evolving from a mainly white
celebration, Carnival was gradually appropriated by the black lower
classes who translated their rhythmic culture and music into the
secularized space of the festival, spreading fear among the whites who
saw (and heard) constantly in black expressive culture intimations of
revolt. The many ordinances banning drum playing only further
strengthened the connection between black identity and rhythm. At every
point, rhythm did not disappear but returned in new forms, by means of
new instruments. Something like in Haiti but in a more muted way, in the
early- to mid-twentieth-century, Trinidad’s rising class of largely
nonwhite intellectuals turned to popular culture as an untainted
repository of authentic, rhythmic black culture. As the proindependence
movement gathered momentum in Trinidad, rhythmic music was slowly
rehabilitated into nationalist discourse. The decisive step in this
evolution was the promotion of the steelpan, which had emerged from the
long-neglected culture of the urban poor as the national instrument of
independent Trinidad.

Ultimately, Trinidad’s history, sounded out, shaped, and prophesied by
the various changes in rhythmic music and developments in percussive
instrumentation, is a history of popular improvisation. The apparently
chaotic, unplanned shifts from one style of music, one kind of
percussive instrument to another mask a deeper, irresistible purpose.
While improvisation is usually understood as an act without foresight,
prescriptive vision, or deep motivation, in practice it is often a
knowing, future-oriented performance that operates as a “kind of
foreshadowing, if not prophetic, description,” according to Fred Moten,
that carries “the prescription and extemporaneous formation and
reformation of rules, rather than the following of them.” In the history
of Trinidad, music and other kinds of performative improvisations, are
far from simple, naive, nonhistorical acts; instead, they foresee and
embody what Moten calls “the very essence of the visionary, the spirit
of the new, an organizational planning of and in free association that
transforms the material.”[^19] Improvisation is always also a matter of
time and sight, a glance to the future, and in Trinidad’s case, the
occasion to see the shape of that future, which has been communicated
primarily through sound, rhythm, and the music without which the great
transformations in Trinidadian society from the colonial era to today
could never have taken place.[^20]

The case of Trinidad, and of the history of the steelpan in particular,
is important, since it offers an implicit critique of the idea put
forward by Nelson George that modern, technological innovation
inevitably diminishes the “blackness” of the music. Fashioned literally
from the wreckage of industrial society—bits of old cars, paint pots,
dustbins, and cement and oil drums—the steelpan is a quintessentially
modern invention, and yet its modernity apparently does not loosen its
association with black identity. On the contrary, its history suggests
that it is rhythmic innovation and technological invention that are some
of the defining aspects of black identity in the Americas.

This is a line of thought expressed by Alexander G. Weheliye in
*Phonographies: Grooves in Sonic Afro-Modernity*. Weheliye questions the
idea that the human and the technological can be definitively separated,
and he proposes that “one is hardly conceivable without the other.” More
specifically, he critiques the common placement of black culture and
being beyond the realm of the technological, the notion that
“Afro-diasporic populations are inherently Luddite and therefore
situated outside the bounds of modernity.”[^21] Similarly, he questions
the neglect in most academic work on technology of what he calls the
“sonic topographies of popular music,” which he says has long been one
of the most fertile areas for the “dissemination and enculturation of
digital and analog technologies.” Popular music is also the primary
domain, he says, in which black subjects have engaged with technology,
so that “any consideration of digital space might do well to include the
sonic in order to comprehend different modalities of digitalness, but
also not to endlessly circulate and solidify the presumed ‘digital
divide’ with all its attendant baggage.”[^22]

*Phonographies* proceeds to examine some of the many ways
twentieth-century black cultural production intersected and engaged with
sound technologies, from the phonograph to the Walkman. Throughout,
Weheliye regards the technologization of black music and culture not as
moments of inauthenticity but as “a condition of (im)possibility for
modern black cultural production.” In general, he makes a compelling
case for the reconsideration of the idea that black cultures are pre- or
antitechnological and for the study of sound recording and reproduction
in relation to black cultural production as a means of identifying the
“singular mode of (black) modernity.” As he puts it later in the work,
there is “no Western modernity without (sonic) blackness and no
blackness in the absence of modernity.”[^23]

This is an idea Weheliye restates in the recent *Small Axe* discussion
of his book alongside Julian Henriques’s *Sonic Bodies*, another work
that in its analysis of the sound system considers blackness to be
integral to sonic technological innovation and vice versa.[^24]
Henriques, in his *Small Axe* response, echoes to some degree Weheliye’s
argument on the importance of blackness to modernity, saying that “those
human beings whom slavery attempted to reduce to machines are precisely
the ones who gave the modern world its musical humanity” and that “there
is little disjuncture between African sensibilities and
technologies.”[^25] Henriques’s *Sonic Bodies* shows how dancehall
“riddims” draw on Kumina rhythms and that, as such, “ancient old-world
African traditions ‘come up to the time’ . . . with the latest digital
technologies.”[^26] His analysis of the figure of the emcee further
demonstrates the dynamic fusion of traditional performance motifs and
ultra-contemporary technological innovation to create a form that
constantly renews itself. Henriques talks of how under the emcee’s
direction “rhythmic energies flood the show” and of how these energies
range from the “electromagnetic flows within the set, such as the forces
of electrical currents . . . to the audio-cultural flows of the music,
the musical flow of the selector’s segueing from one track to the next,
the corporeal and kinetic flow of the crowd, and the socio-cultural flow
of the emcee’s lyrics themselves.”[^27] Rhythm in this context is
“energy, force, or flow” and is related to time through the “ultra-fast
turnover” of styles, sounds, and fashions that characterizes
dancehall.[^28] This is rhythm much as James Brown saw it—as a force of
change and renewal, the embodiment of the imminent future.

Similarly, in his contribution to the *Small Axe* discussion, Weheliye
states of his book: “Instead of imagining Afro-diasporic cultures as
disconnected from the heart of modernity’s whiteness, I demonstrate how
black cultures have contributed to the very creation and imagination of
the modern, interrogating the facticity of blackness, that is, how
certain groups of humans became black through a multitude of material
and discursive powers.” This recognition that blackness is an integral
element of technological modernity has for Weheliye a potential
political value: if blackness is commonly judged to exist beyond what he
calls the “iron grip of the West and modern technologies,” despite it
being a product of these forces, such a recognition offers a way of
dismantling “the coloniality of being in Western modernity” that is the
sense of separation, almost of exile from modernity that informs certain
understandings of blackness, across the Americas, and since at least the
Negritude movement. By insisting on the fundamental importance of black
people and cultures to the “territory,” as he puts it, of Western
modernity, its unique association with whiteness and alienation is
diminished.[^29] It is telling that he uses metaphors of space in his
imagining of the political potential of recognizing blackness as an
integral part of modernity, since they suggest a sense of belonging
physically and culturally to a place, and a possible way out of the
feeling of alienation and exile that are found, again, in classic
formulations of blackness from Negritude to indigenism and exist still
in residual form in Nelson George’s critique of disco. Crucially, too,
such a recognition does not imply the loss of the specificity of “black
life” itself; rather, it calls into question the nature of modernity,
and blackness is reconsidered as a dynamic, evolving, unpredictable
phenomenon, which is not (only) to be recovered from the past but (also)
is something that is in constant, irregular, future-oriented creation.

Although Weheliye does not refer extensively to rhythm, it follows from
his argument that blackness is an effect of modernity, that the
blackness-rhythm equation that George invokes is similarly related to
and dependent on the binary construction of whiteness and blackness
whereby the former is related to technology and machinery and the latter
to earthiness and untainted humanity.

A similar argument is proposed by Peter Shapiro in his 2006 work *Turn
the Beat Around*, which is a more straightforward history of disco music
and which suggests that the “standardized meter and mechanical beats of
disco can be traced back to the very birth of African-American music.”
In his third chapter, subtitled “Automating the Beat,” Shapiro pays
particular attention to rhythm and traces the history of regular,
repetitive beats to Congo Square and the “regimentation and rigidity” of
marching band music.[^30] He also hears in the rhythms of Bo Diddley and
Kraftwerk echoes of the regular, mechanical sounds of the railroads, and
in the latter’s machine-produced beats he hears something that he says
exists in all music: the “trance ritual,” the “eternal rhythm loop that
could transport you across its waves of sound.”[^31] Given what he calls
the “strong presence of automated beats and mechanical rhythms
throughout the history of African-American music,” Shapiro argues that
critics of disco’s “machinelike” qualities such as George tend to ignore
the regular, repetitive rhythms of much black American music of the
twentieth century and to rely on a nonexistent contradiction between
blackness and technological modernity.[^32] George is right, to the
extent that there is a long and complex relationship between rhythm and
notions of blackness in the Americas, but he seems not to recognize
fully the historical conditions in which that association was formed and
that the relationship was always dynamic and evolving, a product of and
not an uncorrupted counter to technological modernity.

In many regards, this rhythm-centered debate echoes Fred Moten’s
critique of Amiri Baraka’s notion of “black spirit,” an idea that black
culture is experienced primarily in terms of deeply-felt,
antitechnological instincts. Living in a hypermodern, technologized
“white” world, Baraka, like earlier counterparts in the Caribbean such
as Césaire and Jean Price-Mars, and somewhat like George in his critique
of disco, evokes a vision of black culture as an organic though static
and unchanging phenomenon, a state of being and feeling that existed
outside the orbit of white experience and as a counterpoint to
technologized modernity. Moten argues that Baraka searches endlessly for
“the unique word, the essence, the meaning, the essential quality of
‘being.’”[^33] Moten further interprets Baraka’s conceptions of race and
culture in terms of a Heideggerian confusion of *humanitas* with
*animalitas*, that is the human with the animal, the biological. It is
as if for Baraka, human nature is programmed biologically, and that
racial differences are fixed and inherited inevitably. Moten’s
skepticism over Baraka’s racialized notion of culture leads him to the
question of rhythm and blackness, and he asks, pointedly, “What, then,
is the connection between *animalitas* and rhythm?,” a question that
recurs in various forms throughout the history of rhythm in the
Americas. In the specific example Moten provides—his deconstruction of
Baraka’s racialized critique of the white jazz player Burton Greene—the
contradictions of Baraka’s theories are exposed. As Moten says, “Baraka
uses the discourse of animality to dehumanize Greene, a discourse marked
by race and rhythm, though he criticizes that discourse as it applies to
blacks in the very same essay.”[^34]

Black performance for Baraka is in this way not just or not primarily
the sound; it is, Moten says, “the unmediated performance of essential
blackness (and whiteness) that is made apparent in the difference
between sounds.”[^35] It is in and on this space of racial difference,
in which rhythm acts as a primary racial differentiator, that Baraka
erects his barrier between earthy, authentic, antitechnologial black
culture and alienated, rootless, technologized white culture.

There is also an important sexual element in Baraka’s and George’s
discourses of race, rhythm, and music, in that in Baraka’s case
blackness is hypermasculine, and it self-consciously opposes itself to
what Moten calls an “aestheticized Euro-cultural effeteness that is
alienated, commodified, artifactualized, necessarily homosexual.”[^36]
Similarly, George laments what he calls the “metallic sexuality” of
Eurodisco that matched, he says, “the high-tech, high-sex, and low
passion atmosphere of the glamorous discos that appeared in every
American city.” His telling alignment of technology and emasculated
black sexuality is related to his subsequent remark that most of the
club deejays who were pushing disco music were “gay men with a singular
attitude toward American culture, black as well as white.” While black
female singers such as Donna Summer, Grace Jones, and Gloria Gaynor were
promoted, black male singers, including the funk artists that he sees as
bastions of “raw” rhythmic, male music, were “essentially shunned.”[^37]

In a similar sense, Baraka’s black, male “earthiness” functions as a
corrective to a feminized white aesthetic by deploying what Moten calls
a “purely and necessarily heterosexual, socially realistic (if not
naturalistic), lyric masculinity.” This extreme masculinism, as Moten
recognizes, is a product of history, a response to and repudiation (and,
he says, repetition) of the historical violation of black maternity. It
is he says a masculinist radicalism born of the severance of filial
ties, “the aesthetic and political assertion of motherless children and
impossible motherhood.”[^38] It is therefore a defensive, compensatory
masculinism that responds to very real historical traumas but which
tends to trap itself by reducing and limiting its own potential meaning.
As perhaps the single most important aesthetic aspect of this male
assertion, rhythm acts like mother and father, or stands in place of
them in their absence, and is jealously guarded by Baraka and others who
assert their earthy, grounded, authentic cultural attachments even as
this assertion implies simultaneously their historical lack of
attachment and their ongoing social and political emasculation.

If the ideas of Weheliye, Shapiro, and Moten counter and perhaps negate
George’s argument that electronic rhythms effectively “steal the soul”
of black music, there remains a further issue that they do not engage
with but that is crucial to the history of rhythm in circum-Caribbean
societies. At many moments in the history of social and political change
in the region—indigenism in Haiti, Negritude in Martinique, *negrismo*
in the hispanophone Caribbean, the civil rights era in North
America—rhythm has been allied to radical political movements as a
marker of racial and cultural distinctiveness, and in music and
literature rhythm has been an integral part of anticolonial, radical
expression. In the contemporary period, the relation between rhythm and
radical political ideas is less apparent; indeed, one might say that
rhythm is no longer an integral element in any poetics of resistance,
has lost its association with radical blackness, and has become
something of a deracialized, dehistoricized commodity.

Perhaps this apparent decoupling of radical politics and rhythm may be
explained in part by the rather loose, unquestioning definition of what
constitutes the “radical” in the discourses of blackness that I have
mentioned thus far: chiefly Negritude, Haitian indigenism, and Black
Power. These movements would no doubt be included in Anthony Bogues’s
definition of the “black radical tradition” as a “distinct political and
intellectual tradition in which the markers are African and African
Diaspora elaborations of ideas, practices, cultural and literary forms,
as well as religious formations and political philosophy.”[^39] In each
case, though in different ways and in different circumstances, rhythm
was harnessed to a certain idea of blackness that presented itself as
radical but that was also in some senses quite conservative, even
reactionary in some regards. Negritude’s essentialist idea of blackness
has been critiqued by Fanon, Ménil, and Glissant in the ways I indicate
above, while Haitian indigenism mutated over time into the *noiriste*
ideology that underpinned the Duvalier dictatorships, and Black Power’s
radical edge was perhaps blunted by the masculinism exemplified by
Baraka. Likewise, one might say that the idea of rhythm in many of these
cases was quite traditional and conservative—the relatively
straightforward, repetitive beats of “African rhythm” that could be
incorporated into poetry and music to create a simulacrum of radical
aesthetics and thought but that retained a conservative edge that may
have limited its political impact and allowed it to be appropriated and
diluted in the ways George decries.

The truly radical rhythms, in the sense of formal experimentation, and
perhaps also the most searching explorations of modern blackness of the
mid-twentieth century, were found in styles such as free jazz. As
Ekkehard Jost puts it, “Without question, free jazz, with its retreat
from the laws of functional harmony and tonality, the fundamental rhythm
that went throughout, and the traditional form schemes, posed the most
radical break in the stylistic development of jazz.”[^40] George Lewis
draws a distinction between “nonrepresentational,” experimental “white”
art of the period and the improvised, formally daring music of
contemporary black artists who, he says, insist “music has to be ‘saying
something.’”[^41] Every effort, Lewis says, was made by black musicians
“to recover rather than disrupt historical consciousness” and “the new
black musicians felt that music could effectuate the recovery of history
itself.”[^42] The rhythms of free jazz expressed, in a sense, an idea of
blackness, or of being *tout court*, that was always on the edge,
unpredictable, opaque, and unknowable in ways that reflect in turn the
more radical expressions of postplantation identity that one finds in,
for example, Glissant—the sense of a history and an identity that
shimmers, as it were, or quivers rhythmically, in a way, rather than
ever coming into full, knowable being. It is therefore no surprise that
in one of his relatively rare references to jazz music, Glissant states,
“My writing style is the jazz style of Miles Davis.” When asked how the
two styles could be linked, Glissant answers, “Through rhythm.”[^43] And
following a searching comparative analysis of the two artists’ work,
Jean-Luc Tamby concludes, “Through breathing, through *la mesure* and
*la démesure*, and in the figure of the spiral, we can see that the work
of these two creators, each in its own way, is centred on rhythm.” As
Glissant says, rhythm is more than a feature of aesthetic style; it is
“a lever of awareness,” which “opens up space,” liberating, Tamby says,
not just style but the imagination and existence itself, carrying with
it “foreknowledge” of a “complex and unexpected new region of the
world.”[^44]

What is ultimately at stake in this discussion of rhythm and race in the
“digital age,” and in what sense might rhythm function still as a “lever
of awareness”? In partial answer to that question, and to consider the
issue of rhythm and race from a slightly different, though I think
complementary, perspective, I close by referring to David Scott’s recent
argument that this is a stalled, tragic time in the Caribbean, and I
draw connections between the apparent redundancy of revolutionary,
anticolonial thinking in the present and the perhaps less apparent
decoupling of rhythm and race in contemporary musical styles. This
disengagement may be related to Scott’s idea of a distinct separation of
time and history in the Caribbean. In Scott’s terms, the once
self-evident notion of the natural convergence between time and history
requires radical revision, for history itself has in a sense stalled, in
the Caribbean and in the broader world. For Scott, history no longer
unfolds in a process of “discrete but continuous, modular change” or as
a “linear, diachronically stretched-out *succession* of cumulative
instants.” The future no longer overcomes the past, and the present is
not experienced as a “state of expectation and waiting for the
fulfillment of the promise of social and political improvement.”[^45]
The primary causes of the sense of historical blockage are the end of
the era, again in the Caribbean and elsewhere, of “revolutionary
socialist possibility” and the coming to prominence of “the new utopia
of liberal democracy, its dogma of human rights, and the disciplining
and governmental technologies to urge and enforce its realization.”[^46]
As Scott writes, in the moment in which history has appeared so
resistant to change, “time has suddenly become more discernible, more
conspicuous, more at odds, more palpably *in question*.”[^47] The
apparent end of the prospect of a discernibly different and improved
political and social future in the Caribbean had led Scott to write
previously that “we live in tragic times.”[^48] The narrative of
Caribbean history, and therefore of time, has shifted from the Romantic
anticolonial model of change and overcoming to one of tragedy, which
Scott prefers as a mode of interpreting the stalled present.[^49] In
terms of time, to read Caribbean history as tragedy is to question
whether the past can be truly disentangled from the present. In place of
what Scott calls the “seemingly progressive *rhythm*” of time, tragedy
presents “a broken series of paradoxes and reversals,” unpredictable,
nonlinear movements in time and history that confuse any sense of the
distinctiveness of past, present, and future.[^50] It is telling that
Scott finally invokes rhythm to refer to the apparently lost sense of
moving forward in time and history, for it was rhythm that has
historically opened colonial and postcolonial societies in the Americas,
however imperfectly and fleetingly, through cultural performances such
as carnival and Canboulay, and that, always turned toward the future,
was among the most persistent means by which social hierarchies were
destabilized and finally overturned. Historically, rhythmic performances
in the Caribbean and the broader Americas have been future-oriented
means of imagining a different, better time to come, and if we see in
the present a decoupling of rhythm and race, it is perhaps at least in
part because history itself has lost its own forward momentum, its own
rhythm of change and renewal. If, however, we start to look beyond the
apparently stalled present and consider the dynamic, often unforeseen,
ways rhythm has shaped black (and white) being in the Americas, we are
left with a final, tantalizing question: Could it be that the decoupling
of rhythm and race is temporary, or that rhythm is already, as it has
always been, in and of the future, a form of foreknowledge levering
awareness, as Glissant says, and that its presence in new digital arenas
of black (and nonblack) production and performance constitutes already
the pre-echo of an as-yet-unheard or -unseen, reconfigured, newly
politicized notion of blackness (and perhaps race more broadly) to come?

---

[^1]: Nelson George, *The Death of Rhythm and Blues* (New York: Penguin,
    1988).

[^2]: Ibid., 147.

[^3]: Ibid., 156, 147, 156.

[^4]: Ibid., 154.

[^5]: Ibid., 155.

[^6]: See Peter Shapiro, *Turn the Beat Around: The Secret History of
    Disco* (Basingstoke, UK: MacMillan, 2006), 98.

[^7]: Ann Danielsen, “Introduction: Rhythm in the Age of Digital
    Reproduction,” in Anne Danielsen, ed., *Musical Rhythm in the Age of
    Digital Reproduction* (Farnham: Ashgate, 2010), 1.

[^8]: Ibid., 2.

[^9]: Ibid., 3.

[^10]: Ibid., 4.

[^11]: Jacqueline Rosemain, *La Danse aux Antilles: Des rythmes sacrés
    au zouk* (Paris: L’Harmattan, 1990), 34, 37 (translation mine).

[^12]: Gérard Barthélemy agrees that “there is nothing in rhythm that is
    due to a particular morphology, and even, less to race; genetics
    clearly have nothing to do with it. Everything is on the contrary
    the result of automatisms, themselves due to a long apprenticeship
    in the course of growing up.” Gérard Barthélemy, *Créoles-Bossales:
    Conflit en Haïti* (Petit-Bourg, Guadeloupe: Ibis Rouge, 2000), 173
    (translation mine). For example, in his seminal study, John Miller
    Chernoff talks of the functional importance of rhythm at all levels
    and all ages in African existence: “African children play games and
    sing songs displaying a rhythmic character . . . learn to speak
    languages in which proper rhythmic accentuation and phrasing is
    essential to meaning. . . . Facility with rhythms is something
    people learn as they grow up in an African culture, one of the many
    cultural acquisitions that make someone seem familiar to people who
    have also learned the same things. Rhythms are built into the way
    people relate to each other.” John Miller Chernoff, *African Rhythm
    and African Sensibility* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1979), 94. Miller’s project examines the sociocultural significance
    of African rhythm and music and their deep “integration into the
    various patterns of social, economic, and political life” (35).

[^13]: Quoted in Jacqueline Sieger, “Entretien avec Aimé Césaire,”
    *Afrique* 5 (October 1961): 65.

[^14]: Antonio Benítez-Rojo, *The Repeating Island: The Caribbean and
    the Postmodern Perspective*, trans James E. Maraniss (Durham, NC:
    Duke University Press, 1992), 169.

[^15]: On rhythm in Césaire, Fanon, Ménil, and Glissant, see Martin
    Munro, *Different Drummers Rhythm and Race in the Americas*
    (Berkeley, University of California Press, 2010), chap. 3.

[^16]: On rhythm, Black Power, and James Brown, see Munro, *Different
    Drummers*, chap. 4.

[^17]: Henri Lefebvre writes of how modern (Western) music has been
    shaped by a “massive irruption of exotic rhythms.” *Eléments de
    rythmanalyse* (Paris: Editions Syllepse, 1992), 58.

[^18]: See also Paul Gilroy’s argument that purpose-built reggae sound
    systems in English inner cities “disperse and suspend the temporal
    order of the dominant culture.” As the sound system wires are strung
    up and the lights go down,” Gilroy says, “dancers could be
    transported anywhere in the diaspora without altering the quality of
    their pleasures.” *There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack: The
    Cultural Politics of Race and Nation* (1987; repr., London:
    Routledge, 2002), 284.

[^19]: Fred Moten, *In the Break: The Aesthetics of the Black Radical
    Tradition* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2003), 63,
    64.

[^20]: For more on the history of rhythm in Trinidad, see Munro,
    *Different Drummers*, chap. 2.

[^21]: Alexander G. Weheliye, *Phonographies: Grooves in Sonic
    Afro-Modernity* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2005), 2.

[^22]: Ibid., 2–3, 3.

[^23]: Ibid., 12, 3, 174.

[^24]: Julian Henriques, *Sonic Bodies: Reggae Sound Systems,
    Performance Techniques, and Ways of Knowing* (London: Continuum,
    2011). For the discussion in *Small Axe* of this book and Weheliye’s
    *Phonographies*, see Tavia Nyong’o, “Afro-philo-sonic Fictions:
    Black Sound Studies after the Millennium,” *Small Axe*, no. 44 (July
    2014): 173–79; Alexander G. Weheliye, “Engendering Phonographies:
    Sonic Technologies of Blackness,” *Small Axe*, no. 44 (July 2014):
    180–90; and Julian Henriques, “Dread Bodies: Doubles, Echoes, and
    the Skins of Sound,” *Small Axe*, no. 44 (July 2014): 191–201.

[^25]: Henriques, “Dread Bodies,” 200.

[^26]: Henriques, *Sonic Bodies*, 12.

[^27]: Ibid., 191–92.

[^28]: Ibid., 192.

[^29]: Weheliye, “Engendering Phonographies,” 181.

[^30]: Shapiro, *Turn the Beat Around*, 90.

[^31]: Ibid., 93.

[^32]: Ibid., 97.

[^33]: Moten, *In the Break*, 144.

[^34]: Ibid., 145.

[^35]: Ibid.

[^36]: Ibid., 150.

[^37]: George, *Death of Rhythm and Blues*, 154.

[^38]: Moten, *In the Break*, 151, 215.

[^39]: Anthony Bogues, “C. L. R. James, Pan-Africanism, and the Black
    Radical Tradition,” *Critical Arts* 25, no. 4 (2011): 484.

[^40]: Ekkehard Jost, quoted in George A. Lewis, *A Power Stronger Than
    Itself: The AACM and American Experimental Music* (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2008), 41.

[^41]: Lewis, *A Power*, 41.

[^42]: Ibid., 42.

[^43]: Edouard Glissant, quoted in Jean-Luc Tamby, “The Sorcerer and the
    *Quimboiseur*: Poetic Intention in the Works of Miles Davis and
    Edouard Glissant,” in Martin Munro and Celia Britton, eds.,
    *American Creoles: The Francophone Caribbean and the American South*
    (Liverpool: University of Liverpool Press, 2012): 148, 153.

[^44]: Tamby, “Sorcerer and the *Quimboiseur*,” 161, 162.

[^45]: David Scott, *Omens of Adversity: Tragedy, Time, Memory, Justice*
    (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2014), 5.

[^46]: Ibid., 4.

[^47]: Ibid., 12 (emphasis in original).

[^48]: David Scott, *Conscripts of Modernity: The Tragedy of Colonial
    Enlightenment* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2004), 2.

[^49]: Ibid., 8.

[^50]: Ibid., 13 (emphasis in original).
