---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Twitter’s and @douenislands’ Ambiguous Paths"
  "short": Ambiguous Paths
author: 
- name: Jeannine Murray-Román
  shortname: Murray-Román  
link: 
date: May 2016
issue: 1
order: 2
abstract: "The Douen Islands project was cofounded in 2013 by a group of Trinidadian artists, including poet Andre Bagoo, graphic designer Kriston Chen, and artist Rodell Warner, among others. Its name refers to the folk figures of douen, whose backward-pointing feet create backward paths. This essay uses a Twitter-focused analysis to explore the representations of the douen in two Douen Islands projects: first, considering the social mediatization of the text and the performance event the artists created, and, second, exploring how a backward-reading practice impacts possible interpretations of the douen’s persona as tweeted in these two projects."
---

In describing his aims in conceiving of a collaboratively written,
destined-for-Internet-publication book of poetry, Andre Bagoo states, "I
wanted to use the internet as a forum for sharing this particular work.
I wanted to do something compelling online, in a way that we might not
expect, given the subject matter, or given our idea of Caribbean
poetry."[^1] The result of this inspiration is Douen Islands, an
artists’ collective based in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, and
spearheaded by poet and journalist Bagoo (1983–), with graphic designer
and visual artist Kriston Chen (1982–).The folkloric figure that anchors
this project is the *douen*, a figure that, as the spirit of abandoned
children, represents social crisis and a cycle of violent neglect on a
national scale. This essay explores the transformations that the
notoriously mysterious figure of the douen undergoes when Douen Islands
creates an identity for it on the social media platforms of Twitter and
Tumblr. This conjunction of private and social is salient in both of the
projects Douen Islands has produced as of March 2016. In the first
manifestation, the e-book [*Douen Islands Issue 001: Tomorrow Please God*](http://www.dropbox.com/s/1kopn1kb0st781s/DouenIslands.pdf){:target="_blank"}, the collective, which included Brianna McCarthy (illustrator), Sharda
Patasar (sitarist), and Rodell Warner (artist), published a downloadable
PDF on the official Douen Islands Tumblr page, released on 31 October
2013.[^2] Douen Islands’s second manifestation was an experimental
poetry reading at the Alice Yard performance space in Port of Spain,
which took place on 12 April 2014.[^3] Named after one of Bagoo’s poems
in *Tomorrow Please God*, "In Forest and Wild Skies," the event featured
readings by Bagoo, Sharon Millar, and Shivanee Ramlochan, as well as
live tweets by Warner. Both the e-book and the poetry reading were
organized around the project’s goals to welcome the douen in from its
social marginalization. I argue that the douen, when articulated through
Twitter as part of these projects, uses the writing conventions of the
social media platform to reassert its location in the margins and,
paradoxically, remain ambiguous to the point of unreadability. The
gesture to social media within these texts and performances therefore
creates a dynamic counterpoint that retains the douen’s characteristic
powers of deception through twenty-first-century tools.

Twitter, like other microblogging platforms, is most known for short but
constantly updated descriptions of users’ quotidian observations and
experiences. Douen Islands draws on this incremental and short-form
performance of identity, which is based on ongoing disclosures through
"a staccato of one-liners" that are, as Michele Zappavigna writes, meant
to affiliate users to one another.[^4] The collective also relies on the
platform’s formal elements, notably, the discontinuity of tweets,
Twitter’s reverse chronological organization, and a volume of production
that creates effective ephemerality. First, while tweets can be linked
together with "cont." or "1 out of x number \[of tweets\]," generally
they are assumed to be discontinuous, recording separate ideas and
located in separate contexts. As such, they lend themselves to the work
of de- and recontextualization to which Chen puts Warner’s tweets when
curating them for *Tomorrow Please God*. Second, reverse chronology
sidesteps the traditional beginning-to-end reading experience of most
print matter by placing the most recently published tweets at the top of
the feed.[^5] In general, this practice stresses the importance of
immediacy, but when tweeted from the user handle @douenislands and
invoking a folk figure whose signature act is to create backward paths,
I propose that the reference to reading on Twitter signals a social
media platform that has acculturated us to reading in reverse.

This reverse chronology and temporal backward organization is the
primary link to the douen figure, who has a backward practice of its
own. The douen is the spirit of a child who died before being baptized
and then becomes a kind of bogeyman who, at dusk, tries to lure
neglected children away from their homes and into the forest. Some
aspects of the douen’s appearance are variable: the douen sometimes has
no face or sometimes has a small round mouth with which it feeds on
water crab, and yet in other instances, the face is covered by its
large, floppy straw hat. Its only absolutely fixed characteristic is
that its feet are on backward.[^6] In the project description on his
website, Chen remarks that he was inspired by Alfred Codallo’s
representation of Trinidad’s mythology in the 1958 watercolor
"Folklore."[^7] In this painting, which art critic and artist Kenwyn
Chrichlow identifies as providing, in an art historical context, "a
reflection of concerns expressed during the decolonization of Trinidad
and Tobago in the years before political Independence in 1962," the
douen are on the margins of the frame or on the edges of the river,
their awkward feet requiring a double-take in an already fantastical
painting.[^8] As filtered through this painting, the folk figure has a
timeless quality at the same time that it is also historically anchored
in processes of nation building. In recontextualizing the douen for
early-twenty-first-century concerns, Douen Islands mines the douen’s
characteristic environment to explore marginalization: dusk as a liminal
moment, the forest as a space of ominous mystery, and the paths left by
the douen’s backward feet that misdirect anyone who might be chasing
after stolen children. It is from the starting point of the douen’s role
as providing a dangerous reminder of the possible consequences of social
neglect that I consider Chen’s incorporation of Warner’s tweets into
*Tomorrow Please God* as well as Warner’s live-tweeting during Douen
Islands’s Alice Yard event.

Douen Islands uses Tumblr as the primary organ for publishing and
advertising its works and events, including its first manifestation,
*Tomorrow Please God*, which Chen designed with InDesign for screenic
reading as a PDF. Digital tools are important to two aspects of the
project: first, Bagoo and Chen used Tumblr to develop a collaborative
creative model, and, second, online publication creates its own circuits
for dissemination. When first developing a working relationship, Bagoo
and Chen began with a cowritten Tumblr page on which Chen would post
visual responses to Bagoo’s poems, and they would each critique the work
that had resulted from their exchanges. Tumblr’s aptness for publishing
images was suited to placing Bagoo’s poetry and Chen’s image-based
vocabulary in an evenly matched conversation. *Tomorrow Please God* was
therefore created through a series of dialogues between Chen and Bagoo
and in relation to Warner’s Twitter feed. Bagoo, Chen, and Warner had
been working together for some time before the creation of *Tomorrow
Please God*, and when Chen was designing the e-book, he identified
tweets from Warner’s feed that resonated with Bagoo’s poems. As Chen
recollects, "Nothing was decided, no instructions were given to Rodell.
Just him doing what he was already doing and if anything that struck me,
then we’d use it."[^9] Chen therefore curated the serendipitous
resonances between Warner’s microblogging and Bagoo’s poetry with
evocative results for thinking about the interaction between social
media and digital art.

Both the process and product of *Tomorrow Please God* are grounded in
artistic exchanges facilitated by text first produced for social media
platforms. *Tomorrow Please God* was published as a downloadable file in
Dropbox and accessible on the Douen Islands Tumblr site from October
2013 to January 2016. As Bagoo comments, "The Internet, while it often
is seen to be in animus with publishing, might also be an opportunity
for post-colonial countries like ours, to publish our own stories in our
own ways, using cyberspace’s breadth of tools and its reach."[^10]
Elsewhere, Bagoo has spoken about the difficulties presented by the
absence of publishers or institutional support for the arts in Trinidad
and Togabo.[^11] Bagoo’s insistence on the local—"our own"—can find
logistical support in the Internet’s capacity to make the text available
locally and immediately, without needing to send the text abroad and
subject it to potentially homogenizing influences before returning it to
readers. While the World Wide Web often alludes to the capability to
connect readers and writers without regard for distance, in this case
the breadth of cyberspace’s reach is focused on building institutions
for poetry in Port of Spain. By conjoining the traditional figure of the
douen with social media platforms, Bagoo, Chen, and their collaborators
are able to both look back to Trinidad’s folkloric roots and to look
forward to emerging digital writing practices.

Douen Islands harnesses digital tools to advertise and disseminate their
work, to develop a collaborative poetic practice, and to experiment with
the genres of microblogging. The use of Twitter at the Alice Yard event
calls attention to the douen’s cutting and sardonic voice while
purposefully re-asserting the douen’s marginalization, and the embedding
of tweets in the e-book evokes the possibility for polyvocal
counter-narratives. I argue that the tweets incorporated in both events
sidestep the project’s goal to bring the douen out of the margins by
normalizing it: these tweets are a site in which the douen retains its
devious potential for misdirection. As such, my readings concentrate
primarily on the relationship between the douen as represented through
the tweets in Douen Islands’s two manifestations and the formal
properties of Twitter. Because an exploration of Twitter’s functionality
undergirds my theorization of how Douen Islands both uses and gestures
to the platform, I also proceed in reverse chronology alongside Twitter
feeds and the douen’s misdirecting footprints: I begin with the Alice
Yard reading before turning to Douen Islands’s inaugurating event, the
e-book *Tomorrow Please God*, in order to explore the potential for
amplifying, remixing, and transforming the folk figure of the douen as a
tweeting subject.

## "In Forest and Wild Skies": The Backchannel and the Bathroom

"In Forest and Wild Skies" was "an experimental evening" of poetry at
Alice Yard, Port of Spain, on 12 April 2014. Andre Bagoo, Sharon Millar,
and Shivanee Ramlochan did not give their readings from lecterns, facing
the audience; the poets were deliberately separated from their
audiences,
[reading](http://www.instagram.com/p/m9BmgSGxJS/?taken-by=douenislands)
from a side room and through a slotted window or from behind a screen
and with the trailer video for the event projected behind them or, in
Ramlochan’s case, silently
[writing](http://www.instagram.com/p/m_SDXEGxJn/?taken-by=douenislands)
on the walls in chalk.[^12] As part of the performance, Kriston Chen
engineered a soundtrack based on recordings of Sharda Patasar’s sitar
performances, now housed on the [Douen Islands Soundcloud page](http://soundcloud.com/douenislands/douen-islands-in-forests-wild-skies-soundtrack-feat-sharda-patasar),
and [Chen’s visual work](http://www.instagram.com/p/m89WgVGxCB/?taken-by=douenislands) was
projected throughout the space, inviting audience members to interact
with both text and image.[^13] Within this event dedicated to douen
voices and experimenting with constrained spaces, staging new
relationships between speakers and audiences, Rodell Warner contributed
live tweets at the event, which were projected into the bathroom and
dubbed "Live-Tweet Stalls." The Live-Tweet Stalls doubled down on the
douen’s marginalization and called attention to the kind of
articulations that are most possible in spaces that are on the edge of
the social. The Live-Tweet Stalls both dwelled in the subversive
intimacy of the bathroom and transformed that private space into a
public one by hybridizing the live and the digital. The specific circuit
in which a tweet was published from @douenislands, projected into the
bathroom, and redigitized as an image of a tweet in the Live-Tweet
Stalls highlighted the tension between the closely guarded privacy and
entry into the domain of the social that the tweeting douen must manage.

For Warner, a photographer and conceptual artist based in Port of Spain,
this interaction between the private and the social is a long-held
interest. One of his early installation pieces, "Photobooth," generated
this dynamic. An interactive photography installation first assembled
during the 2009 Erotic Art Week Port of Spain at Alice Yard,[^14] Warner
created what Dave Williams describes as a "tiny white cocoon, . . .
shrouded off from the rest of the small Alice Yard annex by draping
yards of white fabric from the ceiling," in which participants were
invited to stage their full-body portraits with as much of their bodies
playfully and explicitly revealed or concealed according to their own
choosing; [these photographs](http://www.rodellwarner.com/index.php?/photobooth/) were
then exhibited during the nine-day run.[^15] This conjunction of
intimate interaction and exhibition in "Photobooth" created a nexus
between the private and the social, the cocoon and the digital photo.
The installation was structured by its intermediality, a term that, as
Marcela Fuentes explains, identifies how the interaction of live
performance practices and digital practices can constitute a specific
experiential space.[^16] Warner’s writing of live tweets for "In Forest
and Wild Skies" shares a similar dynamic engagement between the digital
and the live. During the event, Warner’s writing appeared in two spaces:
on the Douen Islands’s feed on Twitter and the bathroom walls at Alice
Yard onto which the feed was projected. The Live-Tweet Stalls combined
the privacy of a bathroom with the broadcasting function of the social
media platform. This form of intermediality relied on the site of the
bathroom as symbol of what the body (politic) eliminates and relegates
to the out of sight, reinforcing the douen’s isolation, while also
publicizing the douen’s presence by placing it into social media
circulation.

Warner’s participation in "In Forest and Wild Skies" used Twitter to
shift the douen’s potentially subversive voice from the margins into an
event’s broader discourse. Because of the critical and even mocking
twist that the live tweets brought to the core questions of social
neglect raised by the figure of the douen, Warner’s participation in the
event corresponds to that of backchanneling. Originating in the field of
linguistics, the backchannel refers to how listeners indicate their
participation in live conversation through nonverbal and phatic
communications that acknowledge their reception of the speakers’ speech.
On Twitter and other social media, backchanneling has come to mean
verbal contributions to the main conversation as audience-participants
voice, record, and publish their responses to an event, adding their
running commentary during a live event in real time in addition to
reactive tokens and nonverbal assents in in-person interactions. The
most common uses of Twitter backchannels are to disseminate notes of the
event to create an archive, to signal boost an event in real time, or to
record questions to give the presenter a heads-up for the direction the
question-and-answer period might take.[^17] The genre can also create
alternate programming accompanying the actual event: sites of instant
critique, parody, mockery, and even derailments of the official
presenters’ aims reshape the conversation so that it speaks to the
audience’s concerns. During "In Forest and Wild Skies," because Warner
tweeted from @douenislands, his participation was both evidently
coordinated with the event, and simultaneously added a sardonic edge to
the evocations of the douen taking place at Alice Yard.

Outside the terminological coincidence of the douen’s backward walk and
the backchannel, what links the two practices? Both the douen and the
backchanneler, existing on the margins of social engagement, draw the
attention of the dominant conversation to its marginal site through
physical or rhetorical violence: the douen, when children are drawn from
their homes; the backchanneler, when pointed commentary derails the
official presentation. The screenic projection of Warner’s tweets in the
Live-Tweet Stalls offered a visualization of how a backchanneler
interacts with the main event: the grainy texture of the vinyl screen or
paper sheet onto which the tweets were projected roughened up the
smoothness of the phone or computer screen.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/douenislands.png"
            url="https://www.instagram.com/douenislands/"
            title="Screen capture of the Douen Islands Instagram account"
            caption="Figure 1. Screen capture of the Douen Islands Instagram account, taken 28 November 2014." %}

<!-- [![Screen capture of the Douen Islands Instagram account](/images/issue01/douenislands.png "Figure 1. Screen capture of the Douen Islands Instagram account, taken 28 November 2014.")](https://www.instagram.com/douenislands/) -->


The image in figure 1, with the edges of the Twitter feed curling up,
reveals how the change in screens from digital to analog distorts its
initial mode of publication. Even when redigitized in order to post on
the @douenislands Instagram page, the waviness and pock marks of the
Live-Tweet Stalls’ intermedial environment retains the roughness of how
Warner backchannels the marginal voice of the douen tweeting at the most
private and perverse edges of social space.

Twitter feeds reveal both how a subject establishes his or her personal
voice and, through mentions of other tweeters and retweets of others’
comments, how he or she forms a community on the social media platform.
Retweeting is most commonly meant to disseminate information to one’s
own followers but can serve as a mode of citation, a way of bookmarking
a tweet for later reference, and, on occasion, can form a loosely and
temporarily held community around a common issue.[^18] From 5:53 p.m. to
6:11 p.m., Warner shifted from writing tweets to retweeting. However,
rather than draw from a wide circle of other Twitter users followed by
@douenislands, Warner retweeted from what was his primary Twitter
account at the time, @wanderroller, restricting the tweeting douen from
a well-connected social ecology. The douen’s own identity and tweeting
voice developed over the course of the evening: the tone of Warner’s
tweets for @douenislands varied widely, including scatological puns,
overt challenges to readers, melancholy, and, occasionally, a flat and
unreadable affect—all of which were voiced in a demotic register. The
identity performed through Warner's fifty-four tweets is that of an
irreverent child-spirit, with a cutting and succinct, even laconic,
wit—as is necessary for the 140-character limitation of the tweeted
utterance. For example, when playing off the title of Douen Islands’s
e-book, *Tomorrow Please God*, Warner as @douenislands inverted the
subject of address from God to a curse: "tomorrow please muh muddacunt"
(5:32 p.m.).[^19] The specific colloquialisms and verbal constructions
of English as spoken in the Caribbean was Warner’s quickest route to
roughening up everything from the national mottos of Trinidad and Tobago
to the key phrases that anchor Douen Islands’s own projects.

Because @douenislands is not a heavily used Twitter account, Warner’s
tweets remain available for analysis as an archive as of April 2016,
creating new dynamics separate from how the individual live tweets
functioned as part of the evening’s performance event and permitting a
retrospective reading of how the tweeting of douen’s descriptions of
self and address to readers shifted over the course the evening. The
first twelve tweets assert self-definitions and ask questions that also
identify the douen’s properties, as in Warner’s first tweet of the
evening as @douenislands, for example:

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/douenislands-twitter.png"
            title="Screencapture of @douenislands Twitter feed."
            caption="Figure 2. Screencapture of @douenislands Twitter feed." %}

<!-- ![Screencapture of @douenislands Twitter feed.](/images/issue01/douenislands-twitter.png "Screencapture of @douenislands Twitter feed.") -->

Warner registers a linguistic ping to signal the presence of the
douen.[^20] It also can serve as a challenge to readers with normalized
physiology to recognize the difference between themselves and the douen
or as a gesture of solidarity for other readers whose feet likewise do
not face front. In part owing to the absence of punctuation—a convention
of electronically mediated writing—this tweet can also take on a flat
and ambiguous tone.[^21] This ambiguity present in each individual tweet
can preserve the douen’s footprints’ characteristic unreadability in its
electronic traces. But as the queries accumulate, the tweets develop a
melancholic tenor. Among the first series of tweets are two tweets that
punctuate the questions with acute pain and recrimination: "plenty
outta allyuh never loss"
(5:25 p.m.) and "plenty times loss"
(5:29 p.m.).[^22] Warner voices the douen’s participation on Twitter as
a dynamic between accusation toward others and isolation of the self.
Considering the live tweets’ archive in the aggregate, Warner oscillates
between the introspection of self-definition and conversational
engagement with readers.

Projected onto a screen in a public place, the tweets are in dialogue
with the other happenings in that place, and, because they are only
available for a few minutes to the public, the tweets do not constitute
a stable and consistently accessible text in its screenic iteration as
part of the Alice Yard performance. As visible in figure 1, the
[Live-Tweet Stalls](http://www.instagram.com/p/m8-KI0GxDb/?taken-by=douenislands)
featured one tweet at a time rather than the entire feed. Warner’s
live-tweeting, which began at 5:13 p.m. and ended at 6:49 p.m., includes
fifty-four tweets. With a rate of roughly one tweet every two minutes,
the text that was created over the course of the evening was aimed more
at aleatory transience than the creation of a coherent archive—even if
such an archive remains available on the Douen Islands Twitter feed as
of February 2016. In a discussion of art installations in which texts
are likewise available for reading only momentarily, Rita Raley says of
such cases, "There is no stable text that one can look *at* for a
meaningful period of time. They are not texts but text effects."[^23]
Moreover, in heavily used social media accounts, the volume at which
tweets are produced and the limited number of tweets that comprise a
feed means that tweets generally have a very short time period of
availability for reading. The posting and responding that takes place on
active feeds is so rapid that older material is pushed off of the page
and becomes inaccessible to users who are not following in real time, as
is the case for Warner’s personal accounts, for example.[^24] For
performance artists such as Man Bartlett, who comments that "seeing a
version of time suspended isn’t nearly as interesting to \[him\], no
matter how it’s archived," this intangibility and the impossibility of
preserving the work is a reason to produce work on Twitter.[^25] For
Warner’s tweeting douen, the instability of the text and the
inaccessibility of tweets creates an experience of effective
ephemerality and a reading experience that is as intractably difficult
as the douen’s backward paths.

The douen’s key physical feature is its backward feet, but it is unclear
how to interpret the social ramifications derived from the capacity of
throwing those who would follow them off track. Some descriptions of
Caribbean folklore indicate that the douen plays pranks on children
because they are the easiest to trap into following the douen into the
forest where the douen abandons them. This version assumes that the
childhood home is an unequivocal site of protection.[^26] But the story
included in Gérard Besson’s essay, which Chen and Bagoo both read,
discussed, and cited in an interview with Nicholas Laughlin, calls into
question the implication that the douen target children out of caprice
or malevolence. Instead, Besson’s source notes that "the Duenn is haunt
the parent" who has no time or attention for her child.[^27] Here, the
douen is attracted to the homes where children are not protected,
perhaps going so far as to acting out of sense of retributive justice by
removing the children from their homes in order to care for them in the
forest. Angelo Bissessarsingh recalls a story told about a douen in the
1940s near Siparia, where a four-year-old child had been lost in the
forest after his parents turned away from him, and when he was found
alive and healthy months later, his well-being was credited to douens,
the beings the child called "his friends."[^28] Reading back through
Besson’s and Bissessarsingh’s stories, the first version wrongly shifts
blame for children’s abandonment onto the douen.

Turning away from the question of blame altogether, Laughlin proposes
that the douen as represented in Douen Islands can serve as an allegory
for the sociopolitical conditions of abandonment and neglect, one that
both creates the douen and is experienced similarly by the contemporary
Trinidadian reader: "Invited in from the wilderness and dark, with
supernatural deformities erased, the douen looks more and more like any
Trinidadian of the post-Independence generation: mischievous but
bewildered, uncertain of his social birthright, possibly hapless,
possibly not helpless."[^29] Drawing similarities between douens and
contemporary Trinidadians, as Laughlin does and as Bagoo and Chen do in
their interview with Laughlin about Douen Islands, highlights the extent
to which the refusal of responsibility that characterizes the
explanations surrounding whether or not douens pose a threat to children
has become a national phenomenon. However, when the douen’s persona is
vocalized through Twitter, both in Warner’s live tweets during the Alice
Yard event and in the tweets drawn from Warner’s Twitter feed to suggest
the presence of a douen in *Tomorrow Please God*, it is the douen’s
differences rather than their commonality with Trinidadian citizens that
surges to the fore. First, the disappearance of its traces resonates
with the effective ephemerality of Twitter feeds. Second, the douen’s
spatially reversed paths are akin to Twitter’s temporally reverse
chronology by creating similar backward reading practices that the
feed’s organization demands. As Ann González comments about another
Caribbean folk figure that is known for backward-pointing feet, "Walking
in reverse becomes a metaphor, like reading in reverse, for a form of
duplicity that offers a space for resistance inside the dominant
codes."[^30] When the backward paths of the traditional douen are paired
with the genre conventions of writing on Twitter, the figure of the
douen plays with the possibility of rejecting the gesture of welcome
into the social sphere offered by Douen Islands projects and reasserts
its place in the margins where it is protected by its unreadability.

## *Tomorrow Please God*: Ambiguous Readings of Half-Backward Feet

Facing the authors’ page of *Tomorrow Please God* is a list of goals
regarding the intervention into the figure of the douen, goals that are
rearticulated in various interviews and publicity materials: "Douen
Islands is a devious remixing of traditional Douen culture. (a) Remove
the straw hats. (b) Invite them inside. (c) Straighten their feet. (d)
All of the above. This is an open collaboration to incite anxiety,
provoke beauty" (n.p.). Douen Islands suggests looking at the douen’s
erased faces instead of using straw hats to avoid confronting their
horror and to bring them into the body politic. Undergirding this list
of actions is an impetus to care for the douen by attempting to repair
its damage: straightening out the douen’s feet would make its traces
legible and endow it with the capacity for direct communication with
others. But this process of healing the douen by making its feet face
front also makes the douen vulnerable to capture. So while this action
welcomes the douen into social belonging, since it would pressure the
douen conform to social norms, it is also a violent gesture that would
neutralize the very deviousness on which Douen Islands relies in order
to perform its cultural remix.

The tweeting persona of the douen as well as the visual representation
of the douen’s feet in *Tomorrow Please God* works against the e-book’s
stated desire to straighten out the douen’s feet. For the douen’s tweets
imply a reverse chronological order for reading, confirm the
disappearance of the douen’s footfalls, and reassert capacity for
cutting social commentary. Moreover, the invocation of Twitter offers
the potential for reading graphic elements of *Tomorrow Please God* as a
resistant backchannel that has been published within the e-book itself.
My analysis of *Tomorrow Please God* focuses on the image vocabulary
that Chen establishes for the douen, the multiple ways of reading the
incorporation of digitally manipulated tweets, and the ways the PDF text
is social-mediatized by its gestures to Twitter and its site of
publication on Tumblr.

The Tumblr account on which Douen Islands disseminates its projects is
itself also subject to creative experimentation with social media
practices, in that Douen Islands draws on the affects most associated
with the platform and also plays with the expectations for how the
platform is best used. Particularly for young users, Tumblr is known as
a social network in which, instead of the curated performance of
effortless perfection most associated with Facebook and Instagram,
users, as Elspeth Reeve writes, "confess their most vulnerable moments
of social mortification" and dwell in the melancholy of heartbreak and
social exclusion.[^31] The douen, in some key ways, corresponds to the
persona of the young, anonymous, and depressed Tumblr user: the douen
has no fixed gender, wears a straw hat covering its face and its long
hair plaited in the juvenile style of two braids. In some descriptions
it is said to call children by name, in others, to have a hollow, owlish
nonverbal "whoop" sound that sometimes devolves into cries and
whimpers.[^32] While the affective tenor of this vein of Tumblr usage
might therefore suit the douen’s soft hooting sound that echoes
throughout the forest, as in all blogging platforms a user’s identity
and its shades develop over the accumulation of posts. Douen Islands,
however, does not generate a constant stream of posts that would permit
a personality to emerge over time. Instead, the Tumblr is a standalone
advertisement for its most recent artistic manifestation.

In this regard, Douen Islands also does not engage one of the uses for
which Tumblr is built: the curation of images either gathered from
around the Web or uploaded to the Tumblr site that all speak to one
specific concept. Tumblr evolved to include text posts of any length as
well as music, videos, and links; but because it was first developed for
users to post one image per entry, the medium is particularly suited for
aggregating visual collections, "sets of images organized through
individual curatorial work and through collective reblogging draw
attention to complex realms of identity, experience, and power
relations," as Marty Fink and Quinn Miller discuss with regards to
sexual self-representation on Tumblr.[^33] This common use for Tumblr
could also be salient to the project of representing and intervening in
the figure of the douen. However, the Douen Islands Tumblr site is not a
repository or archive. In its impermanence, it resembles more a site for
performance in that the materials associated with the performance event
disappear along with the performance once the event has taken place.
When *Tomorrow Please God* was first published in October 2013, the
Tumblr page was red, and in silhouette, flying away through a circle,
were four scarlet ibises, Trinidad and Tobago’s national bird—the same
image on the inside of the cover of *Tomorrow Please God*, where the
project statement goals are printed. Below the image on Tumblr was an
invitation to discover the text by clicking the download link.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/douenislands-tumblr.png"
            title="Screencapture of douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 27 July 2015."
            caption="Figure 3. Screencapture of douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 27 July 2015." %}

<!-- ![Figure 3. Screencapture of douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 27 July 2015.](/images/issue01/douenislands-tumblr.png "Figure 3. Screencapture of douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 27 July 2015.") -->


In the run-up to the Alice Yard event, Douen Islands uploaded
invitations and videos advertising "In Forest and Wild Skies"; the
videos were then used as part of Bagoo’s poetry reading:[^34]

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/douenislands-invitation.png"
            title="Screencapture of 'In Forest and Wild Skies' invitation posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 19 May 2014."
            caption="Figure 4. Screencapture of 'In Forest and Wild Skies' invitation posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 19 May 2014." %}

<!-- ![Figure 4. Screencapture of "In Forest and Wild Skies" invitation posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 19 May 2014.](/images/issue01/douenislands-invitation.png "Figure 4. Screencapture of \'In Forest and Wild Skies\' invitation posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 19 May 2014.") -->

But rather than develop Tumblr’s archival potential, the materials
associated with the Alice Yard event were taken down from the site
shortly after the event was over, and the page reverted to the initial
post with the link to the e-book. After a year and a half, that was
replaced with new materials looking forward to an 9 April 2016
BocasLitFest event.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/kis-ka-dee.png"
            title="Screencapture of Kis-Ka-Dee announcement posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 29 February 2016."
            caption="Figure 5. Screencapture of Kis-Ka-Dee announcement posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 29 February 2016." %}

<!-- ![Figure 5. Screencapture of Kis-Ka-Dee announcement posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 29 February 2016.](/images/issue01/kis-ka-dee.png "Figure 5. Screencapture of Kis-Ka-Dee announcement posted on douenislands.tumblr.com, taken 29 February 2016.") -->


While Douen Islands maintains two
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/douen.islands)
[pages](http://www.facebook.com/douen.islands.1) in addition to their
[Instagram](http://www.instagram.com/douenislands),
[Twitter](file:///C:\Users\Kelly\Documents\sx%20archipelagos%20May%202016\returned\twitter.com\douenislands),
and
[Tumblr](file:///C:\Users\Kelly\Documents\sx%20archipelagos%20May%202016\returned\douenislands.tumblr.com)
accounts, none of them has many followers as of March 2016 or hosts the
conversational exchanges that make these media social.[^35] Because none
of the Douen Islands accounts have the kind of traffic that would create
effective ephemerality on their pages, these pages are more
presentational and reminiscent of Web 1.0 pages. The manual intervention
of loading up and taking down material on the Douen Islands Tumblr site
gestures to the presence and disappearance of posts on heavily used
Twitter accounts and, through this Twitterization of Tumblr, allows the
Tumblr site to take on the effective ephemerality that characterizes
Twitter feeds.

As an e-book published on Tumblr and incorporating the images of tweets,
*Tomorrow Please God* skirts the boundaries of an example of digital art
and Net art. As Robert Simanowski explains the terms, digital art
"depends on digital technology not only for distribution but also for
aesthetic effect," whereas "connectedness provided by the internet"
defines Net art.[^36] The digital technology marking the production
values of the PDF is particularly evident throughout the text, for
example, in the full-spread images of the sea placed at two locations in
the text (1, 24–25): the smooth sheen of the screen on which the PDF is
meant to be viewed heightens the light glinting off of each ripple and
wave of the sea. The most prominent aesthetic effect of the digital
technology is the invocation of social media. Drawing from Twitter for a
PDF that is then disseminated on Tumblr offers an example of how content
can shift across different digital platforms and indicates the
social-mediatization of *Tomorrow Please God*.[^37] To recall Raley’s
discussion of how a text can be transformed into text effect through
"the shift from static pages to real-time streaming data," here the text
is the gesture to real-time streaming data within the static pages of a
PDF that produces the transient and conversational experience of text
effects within a text. *Tomorrow Please God* extends the possibility of
communication even though the social ecology of these tweets is cut off
through their very inclusion in an un-networked e-book.

*Tomorrow Please God* explores the project’s aim to heal and integrate
the douen, a project that itself is in process, as we see in the present
progressive of Bagoo’s discussion of the project’s trajectory: "*Douen
Islands* is about growing up in a world while coming to terms with
injustice in all its forms: violence and crime, racism, homophobia,
religious bigotry, classism, stigmatisation. It is about moving from a
place of blind rage to a place approaching knowledge."[^38]

Beginning from the douen’s social position of being subjected to
injustice, Douen Islands explores how to pivot away from the douen’s
fearful and angry compulsions to create paths that are not limited to
the detours formed by backward feet. But by evoking the backchannel, the
tweets included in *Tomorrow Please God* hold at bay the douen’s
conversion from marginalized outcast to social actor, and the images of
footprints and feet infer that the douen retains its devious potential
for misdirection. Chen’s focus on the formation of the body insists on
the douen’s fantastical physicality and the ambivalent traces it
produces. Drawings of the skeletal and muscular structure of heads,
spines, legs and especially feet and footprints recur in the margins, in
the background, and occasionally centered on the page. While the
prevalence of these visual elements reminds the reader of the
specificities of the douen’s body, the douen’s physical differences are
not made an object of horrified fascination. One full-page spread, for
example, places a diagram demonstrating how a child’s back straightens
out over the course of two years next to the drawing of the skeleton of
a foot:

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/tomorrow-please-god.png"
            title="Tomorrow Please God, 22–23."
            caption="Figure 6. Tomorrow Please God, 22–23." %}

<!-- ![Figure 6. *Tomorrow Please God*, 22–23.](/images/issue01/tomorrow-please-god.png "Figure 6. *Tomorrow Please God*, 22–23.") -->


Because the heads are anatomical drawings in profile where the skin is
not shown, and because the feet are not connected to the rest of a body,
it is impossible to know if this foot is on backward or forward.
Referring to a part of the body that does straighten itself out without
intervention in juxtaposition with an isolated foot could mean that the
foot is the next to be straightened out, or it could place them in
contrast with one another.

The difficulty of ambiguous reading of the feet throughout *Tomorrow
Please God* is encapsulated in the use of the Douen Islands’s avatar in
two separate instances in the e-book (7, 13). With each foot facing the
exact opposite direction, the process of straightening out the feet
seems halfway accomplished and at an interpretive deadlock. This image,
with which the entire project identifies itself in all of its social
media, raises the questions: Which foot is straight and which is still
backward? Which foot will choose the direction for the douen’s path? And
how might a tracker read the traces that this set of half-straight,
half-backward pair of feet will leave behind?

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/tomorrow-please-god-2.png"
            title="Tomorrow Please God, 12–13."
            caption="Figure 7. Tomorrow Please God, 12–13." %}

<!-- ![Figure 7. *Tomorrow Please God*, 12–13.](/images/issue01/tomorrow-please-god-2.png "Figure 6. *Figure 7. *Tomorrow Please God*, 12–13.")
 -->
The two shadowboxes, with the brain on the left side and the
ambi-directional pair of footprints on the right, are elevated above a
background of David LeVay’s *Anatomy, Second Edition*, discussing
"deviated" feet.[^39] The placement allows the two framed images to
borrow the background page’s arrow, literally drawing a causal
connection from the brain’s cognition to the feet’s unreadable
directionality.

Inspired by the fraught directionality of the avatar’s feet, I read the
tweets included in the text both front to back, as indicated by their
inclusion in a book, and in reverse chronology, as corresponds to
Twitter’s formal properties. Chen culled four tweets from @wanderroller,
Warner’s 2013 Twitter feed. Reading these tweets backward I argue that
the tweets constitute a counternarrative to the poems within *Tomorrow
Please God*, a narrative that speaks for the first time on page 22 and
ends inside the front cover, creating the sequence:

> raise me (21)  
>
> imagine giving birth to me (20)  
>
> love is eyes (facing the table of contents)  
>
> you know me (inside the cover page)  

A brief bildungsroman, the tweets begin with the douen’s birth in the
reader’s imagination and offer the reader a set of instructions for how
to interact with the douen in order to counter its folk origins as a
figure of abandonment. Consider, however, reading the tweets in the same
order as the rest of the text. The narrative in that order appears: "you
know me" (inside the cover page), "love is eyes" (facing the table of
contents), "imagine giving birth to me" (20), "raise me" (21). To be
introduced to a character with the phrase "you know me" before even
knowing that the douen is the subject of the e-book and without having
had the chance to explore the douen’s remixed identity through the text
seems bewildering, if not menacing—a tone that is very in keeping with
the fear the douen can induce. Similar to the profile image of feet
facing in two directions, it is the combination of narratives created by
reading in both directions simultaneously that creates an ambiguous
counternarrative to the project’s aims to resolve the douen’s rage and
neglect.

These four tweets exist within *Tomorrow Please God* as a potential
counternarrative and they also function as part of Chen’s visual
vocabulary because of the digital manipulation that Chen performed: he
erased the dates from the tweets and did not include the number of
retweets or favorites, thereby lifting the tweets out of the context of
the stream that originally constituted the tweets’ citational ecosystem
by not expanding them, then copying each three times:

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/tomorrow-please-god-3.png"
            title="Tomorrow Please God, 20–21."
            caption="Figure 6. Tomorrow Please God, 20–21." %}

<!-- ![Figure 8. *Tomorrow Please God*, 20–21.](/images/issue01/tomorrow-please-god-3.png "Figure 8. *Tomorrow Please God*, 20–21.") -->


The inability to place the douen, as the result of Chen’s digital
manipulation, operates on both a spatial and a temporal level: by
cropping out the time-stamps that are normally marked on each tweet,
next to the name and handle, the tweets can be read as being outside of
the immediacy that usually governs the relevance and accessibility of
utterances on Twitter. Moreover, repeating the phrases is meant,
according to Chen, to "amp up the feeling of being in a forest with
douens."[^40] Coming from multiple locations within the darkened forest,
the source of their multiple and demanding reiterations would not be
identifiable. In this sense, the douen’s melancholy and echoing hooting
never loses its timeliness, and the tweets function as constantly
present demands. So while the unlocatability of the douen is usually
because of its backward paths that make its location unreadable, here,
the use of Twitter combined with the removal of time-stamps produces a
temporal unknowability, and the absence of temporal fixity for the
tweets allows the tweets to remain legible backward, forward, and on
endless loop.

To invite marginalized subjects to participate in broader conversations
about their exclusion is a fraught, if necessary, project: What is the
price of entry for these subjects? In the case of the douen, as implied
in the Douen Islands project goals, it might seem to require giving up
one’s primary mode of self-protection, to straighten out its deviations,
and to produce paths that are easily legible. In *Tomorrow Please God*,
Bagoo, Chen, and their collaborators present poems and images that
uncover the douen’s face and invite the douen inside, but they also
include a tweeting douen that continues to assert its unreadability—to
keep at least one foot on backward and retain the potential for
subversively ambivalent readings. In order to manage this dynamic set of
voices that move in different directions, Douen Islands mobilizes the
particular mixture of the private and social that is characteristic of
microblogging platforms. Evoking the traditional folklore figure of the
douen by connecting it with Twitter, a social media platform famous in
part for its use by marginalized groups to organize themselves, allows
Douen Islands to experiment with how a douen might begin to craft a
persona and writing voice. And it is in exploring the writing practices
and functionalities of Twitter that, despite the desire for the douen to
progress toward normalization, working with the representation of the
douen retains its capacity for devious and deviant paths.

---

[^1]: Andre Bagoo, quoted in Nicholas Laughlin, "*Douen Islands* and the
    Art of Collaboration," *Caribbean Review of Books*, 4 November 2013,
    caribbeanreviewofbooks.com/2013/11/04/douen-islands-and-the-art-of-collaboration.

[^2]: Douen Islands, *Douen Islands Issue 001: Tomorrow Please God*,
    with poems by Andre Bagoo; hereafter cited in the text. The PDF can
    be accessed at www.dropbox.com/s/1kopn1kb0st781s/DouenIslands.pdf. A
    link to the PDF was on www.douenislands.tumblr.com from October 2013
    to January 2016.

[^3]: Located at 80 Roberts Street, Woodbrook, Port of Spain, Trinidad
    and Tobago, Alice Yard is a nonprofit gallery and performance space.

[^4]: Michele Zappavigna, *Discourse of Twitter and Social Media*
    (London: Continuum, 2012), 38.

[^5]: In February 2016, Twitter announced that Timelines would change
    from reverse chronology to include an algorithmic mode of
    organization.

[^6]: A figure that shares a similar origin story and the physical
    characteristic of the backward feet with Trinidad and Tobago’s douen
    can be found throughout Latin America as *el duende*.

[^7]: See Kriston Chen, "Douen Islands: In Forest and Wild Skies," 1
    August 2014,
    www.notsirk.com/blog/2014/7/31/douen-islands-into-forests-wild-skies.

[^8]: See Kenwyn Chrichlow, "Figures at the Forest’s Edge," *Kaieteur
    News Online*, 6 June 2010,
    www.kaieteurnewsonline.com/2010/06/06/%E2%80%98figures-trapped-at-the-forest%E2%80%99s-edge%E2%80%99.

[^9]: Kriston Chen, e-mail message to author, 8 July 2015.

[^10]: Andre Bagoo, quoted in Laughlin, "*Douen Islands* and the Art of
    Collaboration."

[^11]: See Geosi Gyasi, "Interview with Trinidadian Poet, Andre Bagoo,"
    25 April 2015,
    geosireads.wordpress.com/2015/04/25/interview-with-trinidadian-poet-andre-bagoo.

[^12]: See www.instagram.com/p/m9BmgSGxJS/?taken-by=douenislands; and
    www.instagram.com/p/m\_SDXEGxJn/?taken-by=douenislands. See also
    performance stills included in Ramlochan’s review of the event, "An
    Evening of Alice Yard Douens," 14 April 2014,
    www.bocaslitfest.com/2014/an-evening-of-alice-yard-douens.

[^13]: See
    soundcloud.com/douenislands/douen-islands-in-forests-wild-skies-soundtrack-feat-sharda-patasar;
    and www.instagram.com/p/m89WgVGxCB/?taken-by=douenislands.

[^14]: The 2009 version of this work was installed and exhibited at
    Alice Yard; its 2010 and 2011 Erotic Art Week installations took
    place at the Bohemia Gallery in Port of Spain.

[^15]: See www.rodellwarner.com/index.php?/photobooth; and Dave
    Williams, "Losing Your Head in the Photobooth," *sx salon*, 9
    November 2009,
    smallaxe.net/wordpress3/works/2009/11/09/dave-williams-on-rodell-warner.

[^16]: Marcela Fuentes, "Performance Constellations: Memory and Event in
    Digitally Enabled Protests in the Americas," *Text and Performance
    Quarterly* 31, no. 1 (2015): 34.

[^17]: See Cliff Atkinson, *The Backchannel: How Audiences Are Using
    Twitter and Social Media and Changing Presentations Forever*
    (Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2010). Using the formulation "an audience
    with an audience" (5) to describe the backchannel, Atkinson notes
    the double-edged potential of a backchannel from the primary
    speaker’s viewpoint: "A backchannel is a line of communication
    created by people in an audience to connect with others inside or
    outside the room, with or without the knowledge of the speaker at
    the front of the room. Usually facilitated by Internet technologies,
    it is spontaneous, self-directed, and limited in time to the
    duration of a live event. A backchannel can be constructive when it
    enhances and extends helpful information and relationships, and it
    can be destructive when it articulates and amplifies
    counterproductive emotions and sentiments" (17). What is
    constructive and destructive—and to whom—is debatable, given the
    relationship between the back-channeler and the dominant voice.

[^18]: Alex Maireder and Stephan Schlögl term these temporary
    communities formed on social networks "encounter-publics," often
    organized around timely and relevant hashtag that allows "less
    conventional voiced \[to\] make themselves heard and sometimes
    heavily interact with the centre." Alex Maireder and Stephan
    Schlögl, "24 Hours of an \#outcry: The Networked Publics of a
    Socio-political Debate," *European Journal of Communication* 29, no.
    6 (2014): 689.

[^19]: https://www.twitter.com/douenislands/status/455141412678684672.

[^20]: Michele Zappavigna defines the "linguistic ping" as a genre of
    tweets that register "I’m still here" (*Discourse of Twitter*, 29).

[^21]: Naomi Baron notes that in social media and SMS texting,
    punctuation is often used only when it carries necessary discourse
    information. Naomi Baron, "Language Use in Online and Mobile
    Communication," in Marie-Laure Ryan, Lori Emerson, and Benjamin
    Robertson, eds., *The Johns Hopkins Guide to Digital Media*
    (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014), 311.

[^22]: twitter.com/douenislands/status/455139629243842560;
    twitter.com/douenislands/status/455140625386835969.

[^23]: Rita Raley, "TXTual Practice," in N. Katherine Hayles and Jessica
    Pressman, eds., *Comparative Textual Media: Transforming the
    Humanities in the Postprint Era* (Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota Press, 2013), 20.

[^24]: While all tweets are stored in giant corporate databases and are
    being archived by the Library of Congress back to 2006, they are
    inaccessible to the lay user once they have been displaced by new
    tweets. Otherwise, commercial social media monitoring tools such as
    Gnip PowerTrack and Datasift exist specifically to allow companies
    to store and dredge information from users’ tweets that are no
    longer viewable by the general public. See Dave Lee, "Twitter
    Partners with Datasift to Unlock Tweet Archive," 28 February 2012,
    www.bbc.com/news/technology-17178022.

[^25]: Man Bartlett, quoted in Benjamin Sutton, "The Many Uses of
    Rhizome’s New Social Media Preservation Tool," *Hyperallergic*, 21
    October 2014,
    hyperallergic.com/157039/the-many-uses-of-rhizomes-new-social-media-perservation-tool/.

[^26]: See "Our Folklore Is Predominantly of African Origin,"
    *TriniView*, www.triniview.com/TnT/Folklore.htm.

[^27]: Gérard Besson, "Mermaids, Imps, and Goddesses: The Folklore of
    Trinidad and Tobago," in *Trinidad and Tobago: Fifty Years of
    Independence* (London: First Magazine, 2012), 54.

[^28]: Angelo Bissessarsingh, "Douens and Other Folkore," *Guardian*, 30
    June 2013,
    www.guardian.co.tt/entertainment/2013-06-30/douens-and-other-folklore.

[^29]: Laughlin, "*Douen Islands* and the Art of Collaboration."

[^30]: See Ann González’s discussion of *ciguapas* in the Dominican
    Republic in *Resistance and Survival: Children’s Narrative from
    Central America and the Caribbean* (Tucson: University of Arizona
    Press, 2009), 8.

[^31]: Elspeth Reeve, "The Secret Lives of Tumblr Teens," *New
    Republic*, 17 February 2016,
    newrepublic.com/article/129002/secret-lives-tumblr-teens.

[^32]: See *Dictionary of the English/Creole of Trinidad & Tobago: On
    Historical Principles*, ed. Lise Winer, s.v. "douen, duende douaine,
    doune, dwen, duegne" (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press,
    2009).

[^33]: Marty Fink and Quinn Miller, "Trans Media Moments: Tumblr,
    2011–2013," *Television and New Media* 15, no. 7 (2013): 621.

[^34]: See vimeo.com/78231839.

[^35]: See www.facebook.com/douen.islands and
    www.facebook.com/douen.islands.1; www.instagram.com/douenislands;
    twitter.com/douenislands; douenislands.tumblr.com.

[^36]: Roberto Simanowski, "Digital and Net Art," in Marie-Laure Ryan,
    Lori Emerson, and Benjamin Robertson, eds., *The Johns Hopkins Guide
    to Digital Media* (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press,
    2014), 134.

[^37]: In their discussion of how Occupy Movement activists moved
    content from YouTube to Twitter, Kjerstin Thorson et. al. show that
    this content shift transforms one platform into a "communal good" as
    a repository of resources as well as a "connective good, linking
    members of a public together and giving them at least the
    possibility of communication." Kjerstin Thorson et al., "YouTube,
    Twitter, and the Occupy Movement," *Information, Communication, and
    Society* 16, no. 3 (2013): 441.

[^38]: Bagoo, quoted in Laughlin, "*Douen Islands* and the Art of
    Collaboration."

[^39]: Deviated feet is a birth defect that results in the infant’s foot
    being shaped like a kidney bean, and in most cases can be resolved
    within a few months, through passive stretching exercises. See
    Ursula Geisen, "Common Foot Deformities Draft 2,"
    *pediatrics.uchicago.edu/chiefs/.../CommonFootDeformitiesDraft2.pd.
    *

[^40]: Chen, e-mail message to the author.
