---
layout: article
section: articles
pdf: neigh-digitizing.pdf
title: 
  "long": "Digitizing the \"Sound Explosions\" of Anglophone Caribbean Performance Poetry"
  "short": Digitizing Sound Explosions
author: 
- name: Janet Neigh
  shortname: Neigh
date: March 2016
issue: 1
order: 1
abstract: "The Internet offers new performance platforms for Caribbean poets who prioritize oral expression. One group realizing this potential is the youth-led artist collective the 2 Cents Movement, based out of Trinidad and Tobago. Members circulate their video poems on social networking sites, and through their do-it-yourself approach, they are building a broader youth audience for their work. More generally, Caribbean poets are often underrepresented in online poetry resources, particularly in institution-based Internet audio archives. This essay uses the 2 Cents Movement as a preliminary model to understand how Internet audio archives can be redesigned to amplify the total expression of Caribbean poetry. Admittedly, the 2 Cents Movement offers only a partial solution to a big problem; however, this essay demonstrates the value of examining poets’ engagements with digital technologies to develop better archival standards and practices in sync with the politics of the work."
---

If Louise Bennett, the prolific Jamaican artist, were still alive and
performing today, how would the Internet fit into her creative practice?
Would she post poetry recordings on Facebook? Would children play with a
Miss Lou app? Would Aunty Roachy deliver wisdom via Twitter? Since
Bennett embraced emerging technologies to teach her audience about the
value of the Jamaican language, social media likely would have played a
prominent role in her education activism. She turned to performance
early in her career to build an inclusive audience, and her media
projects for the Jamaica Broadcasting Corporation—her children’s
television show *Ring Ding* (1970–82) and her radio program *Miss Lou’s
Views* (1966–82)—gave her an expanded terrain to develop her
call-and-response poetics. Unfortunately, searching for Bennett online
today yields few actual sound recordings of her poetry. Bennett’s
underrepresentation online—or, more aptly, her silence, since her words
can be found but rarely her voice—is characteristic of Caribbean poetry
more generally. This essay stems from concern about who has the power to
define poetry in virtual spaces and whose voices receive airtime. As
Kamau Brathwaite establishes in his groundbreaking lecture *History of
the Voice*, anglophone Caribbean poetry should be celebrated for its
“sound explosions,” yet it has remained relatively quiet online.[^1]

Internet audio archives for poetry have flourished in recent years.
Websites such as [PennSound](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/), the
[Poetry Archive](http://www.poetryarchive.org/), the [Poetry
Foundation](http://www.poetryfoundation.org/), the [Academy of American
Poets](https://www.poets.org/), and [UbuWeb](http://www.ubuweb.com) have
provided excellent resources for contemporary poetics. These
twenty-first-century open-access collections offer both live and studio
recordings, roundtable discussions of poetry, lectures, and taped
interviews.[^2] While these digital platforms promise democratization,
they often repeat the exclusions of print archives. Many of these
collections, which now determine the content of poetry syllabi in
university classrooms, reinforce the United States as the dominant
center of anglophone poetry in the Americas.[^3] For example, the Poetry
Foundation has 3,649 author pages, almost half of which are devoted to
US poets. The site features only eleven poets from the Caribbean region,
excluding many major voices from the region, such as Louise Bennett. Of
the eleven Caribbean poet pages, none include audio poems and only seven
of them include actual poetry texts; the other four feature just short
author bios. Caribbean poets are more than simply underrepresented in
these curated collections; their online presence is often sparse,
limited to random YouTube videos.[^4]

Despite their underrepresentation in Web-based audio collections, many
contemporary Caribbean performance poets have embraced digital
technologies to build their audiences. These new digital poetries offer
a solution to what Laurence A. Breiner has characterized as the
“half-life” of Caribbean performance poems.[^5] According to him,
readers unable to attend a poem’s live recitation are always at a
disadvantage because things like tone, gesture, and the poet’s
relationship with her audience also determine meaning. In terms of
distribution, digitized poetry recordings, unhindered by shipping fees
and trade tariffs, surpass print books in their international
portability, making them more accessible to Caribbean diasporic
communities.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/poet-performing-2.jpg"
            title="2 Cents Movement Poet"
            caption="2 Cents Movement Poet" %}

<!-- ![2 Cents Movement Poet](/images/issue01/poet-performing-2.jpg) -->

This essay examines one of the best examples of innovative digital
poetry in the Caribbean: the youth-led artist collective the [2 Cents
Movement](https://twitter.com/2CentsMovement), based in Trinidad and
Tobago. The performers in this collective use social networking sites to
circulate their video poems.[^6] Students at the University of the
Southern Caribbean started the movement in 2010, and their activities
have strengthened youth enthusiasm for spoken-word poetry. Some of their
activities include islandwide school tours, open-mic nights, slam
contests, television and radio broadcasts, video production of poems,
and student poetry workshops. They present themselves as a movement to
align their poetry with social change. Their digital recordings become
modes of production, publication, distribution, preservation, and
community activism. Their populist approach builds on the vernacular
pedagogical dynamics of performance established by figures like Louise
Bennett. By using these technologies to integrate creative and political
praxes, the 2 Cents Movement realizes Brathwaite’s theory of nation
language and his argument that sound reproduction technologies can be
used to reinvigorate Afro-centric oral traditions.[^7]

Brathwaite identifies how nation-language poets challenge the way paper
records were used to discredit oral ways of knowing and uphold
institutional power during colonization. When dub poet Linton Kwesi
Johnson recites his definitive work “[Reggae
Sounds](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8omA7huF6XE),” lines such as
“foot-drop find drum, blood story / bass history is a moving / is a
hurting black story” attack print-centric forms of knowledge.[^8] He
builds on a history of Caribbean people using performance to circumvent
the print archive to produce, record, and transmit knowledge through
embodied acts.[^9] Such knowledge depends on the interaction between the
performer and her audience. The format of Bennett’s *Ring Ding*, in
which she would invite children from the studio audience to join her on
stage to recite poetry with her, exemplifies this well. Such communal
pedagogies also extend to adult audiences. For example, Oku Onuora
defines the goal of dub poetry as consciousness-raising: “It also mean
to dub out the isms and schisms and to dub consciousness into the
people-dem head.”[^10] Performance creates what Brathwaite characterizes
as “total expression,” engendering a space for collective, politicized
vernacular consciousness to take shape: “The other thing about nation
language is that it is part of what may be called *total expression*. .
. . Reading is an isolated, individualistic expression. The oral
tradition on the other hand demands not only the griot but the audience
to complete the community: the noise and sounds that the maker makes are
responded to by the audience and are returned to him. Hence we have the
creation of a continuum where meaning truly resides.”[^11] Although
Brathwaite seems to be arguing here that the full experience of the
sonic continuum depends on live interaction, he actually emphasizes the
opposite. A central point of his text, originally titled “an electronic
lecture” for his 1979 Harvard presentation, harnesses the potential of
sound reproduction technologies to create new pathways for total
expression. For him, they intensify “the detonations within Caribbean
sound-poetry \[that\] have imploded us into new shapes and consciousness
of ourselves.”[^12] Brathwaite’s combustion metaphors of “detonations”
and “explosions” reveal his prioritizing of electronic sound. As
Jonathan Sterne establishes, “all sound-reproduction technologies work
through the use of transducers” that convert acoustic waves into
electronic impulses.[^13] Brathwaite suggests that these energy
conversions amplify total expression rather than weaken it, which the 2
Cents Movement substantiates.

So much scholarship focuses on written documents and techniques from the
past, yet many digital humanists are early adopters. They embrace the
unfinished, invite collaboration, move us off the page, and aim to build
things for the future. Inspired by this approach, this essay uses the 2
Cents Movement as a preliminary model to understand how Internet audio
archives can be redesigned to amplify the total expression of Caribbean
poetry. Admittedly, the 2 Cents Movement offers an incomplete solution
to a much larger problem; however, I argue that we need to begin by
examining poets’ engagements with digital technologies to develop better
archival standards and practices in sync with the politics of the work.
In this collaborative spirit, I also invite readers to click on the
links as they read this essay, to immerse themselves in what is already
online and to think about how we can build on this virtual world of
Caribbean poetics.

Part of what makes Brathwaite’s *History of the Voice* an important
catalyst for building digital archives is that he avoids the tendency in
oral scholarship to fixate on the live event. For example, Hugh Hodges
stresses the difficulty of studying performance poetry, lamenting that
we typically examine only “the textualized trace of it.”[^14] He
considers sound and video recordings as texts, because he argues that
the total expression of the live event does not get captured on them.
Similarly, Peggy Phelan claims that what she calls “liveness” disappears
in recordings of a performance.[^15] As Sterne puts it, this attitude
upholds “face-to-face communication and bodily presence” as “the
yardsticks by which to measure all communicative activity” and
“define\[s\] sound reproduction negatively, as negating or modifying an
undamaged interpersonal or face-to-face copresence.”[^16] Brathwaite
takes a more innovative approach to sound reproduction technologies by
highlighting their capacity to challenge print-centric aesthetics. The 2
Cents Movement demonstrates how digital technologies provide even more
opportunities for this through their use of music videography and
microblogging. However, what Brathwaite envisioned more than thirty
years ago through “resonating tape\[s\],” eight tracks, and LPs has yet
to be fully realized in the broader terrain of our research
methodologies and poetry resources.[^17]

Critical approaches to performance poetry have been slow to develop
because of the Western assumption that “the text of a poem—that is, the
written document—is primary and that the recitation or performance of a
poem by the poet is secondary and fundamentally inconsequential to the
‘poem itself.’”[^18] While the digital should free us from our obsession
with a text-based idiom in literary studies, it has yet to do so.[^19]
As this essay demonstrates, even the designs of most online poetry audio
collections still privilege the methodology of textual close reading
rather than encourage us to develop new sound-based methods of
analysis.[^20] In a similar vein, recent efforts to build Caribbean
digital archives have focused on converting print documents and have not
engaged as much with sound media.[^21] Resources and funding certainly
drive this, since print materials are easier and cheaper to digitize.
Yet given the oral dimensions of Caribbean cultures, we must address how
to represent and archive performance to overcome the structural biases
of print archives.

## Creating Digital Griots: The 2 Cents Movement

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/audience-interaction-1.jpg"
            title="Audience Interaction"
            caption="Audience Interaction" %}

<!-- ![Audience Interaction](/images/issue01/audience-interaction-1.jpg) -->

Scrolling through the [2 Cents Movement’s Facebook
page](https://www.facebook.com/The2CentsMovement/) reveals a vibrant
online poetry community. As of December 2015, they have more than 13,000
followers, and its page includes announcements about upcoming
performances, photographs of previous performances, political news
updates, links to live-stream its events, and video poems. Facebook’s
campus origins explain why this social networking site designed for
college students has played a central role in the development of the
movement. The founder, Jean Claude Cournand, an undergraduate at the
time, sought to build a stronger intellectual youth culture—to invite
youth to put in their two cents by expressing their views on current
issues (ranging from marijuana legislation to homophobia) through
spoken-word poetry. In an interview, he explained that they chose “to go
into the digital habitat rather than trying to reach people through
events alone” in order to attract a youth audience.[^22] Their
best-known projects are the Intercol and Verses national slam
competitions, held annually as part of the Bocas Lit Festival.[^23] The
two different slams—Intercol features high school teams, and Verses
features prominent poets who compete individually—reflect their
mentorship structure. The 2015 winner of the Intercol slam, [Michael
Logie](http://www.bocaslitfest.com/2015/the-spoken-word-intercol-champion-is/),
got to pick a 2 Cents Movement poet as a mentor to work with him for a
year to help him develop his poetry.[^24] The 2 Cents Movement has also
collaborated with the Trinidad and Tobago Radio Network on the [Free
Speech Project](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLsZJUoc_yr1ufNZGIsFg74Fl3yuZTNU9k),
for which young artists recite their poems weekly on the radio. These
poems are also produced as videos and archived on the network’s YouTube
channel.[^25] The majority of the movement’s activities are coordinated
and advertised online, and major events like the slam contests can be
live-streamed. The 2 Cents Movement exists solely through freely
accessible sites and does not have its own server or domain name, which
suggests that a lack of resources does not need to be an obstacle to
building an online presence for Caribbean poetry. In addition to
reaching youth in Trinidad and Tobago, the artists have gained an
international following by circulating their poetry on social media.

Twitter and Facebook updates for the 2014–2015 Courts Bocas Speak Out
Tour, involving more than fifty secondary schools, demonstrate 2 Cents
Movement’s use of these platforms to enhance audience interaction.
During this tour, some of the nation’s best performance poets mentored
high school students as they wrote and performed their own works through
performances and workshops. These school visits provided a way for the 2
Cents Movement to promote the Intercol slam competition. Photo
live-tweets of the tour performances often focused on the students in
the audience actively participating rather than on the poet performing.
In these shots, the camera points at the audience, often catching only
the performer’s back or the corner of her shoulder.[^26]

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/audience-interaction-2.jpg"
            title="Audience Interaction"
            caption="Audience Interaction" %} 

<!-- ![Audience interaction](/images/issue01/audience-interaction-2.jpg) --> 

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/poet-performing-1.jpg"
            title="Poet performer"
            caption="Poet performer" %} 

<!-- ![Poet performer](/images/issue01/poet-performing-1.jpg) -->

The online viewer gets to stare out at the auditorium filled with students, which allows her to occupy the performer’s gaze but also view a student’s face
as a mirror, inviting her to identify with both the performer and the
audience. This elaborates on the pedagogy offered during the tour, in
which the poets’ performances provide students with a model for their
own poetry aspirations. Visually, Twitter and Facebook followers become
situated in the continuum of total expression—in the reciprocal exchange
between performer and audience.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/audience-interaction-3.jpg"
            title="Audience interaction"
            caption="Audience interaction" %} 

<!-- ![Audience interaction](/images/issue01/audience-interaction-3.jpg) -->

High school students who attended a 2
Cents Movement performance at their own school could then follow them on
Twitter and Facebook and connect those images to their own participation
in the live event. The photos (and the movement as a whole) downplay
individual author celebrity in favor of building a student-focused
collectivity. The 2 Cents Movement uses Twitter and Facebook to create
“a constancy of presence” to link together different high school
communities in Trinidad and Tobago.[^27]

Although these social media platforms governed by the commercial needs
of US-based multinationals certainly hold limitations, rhetoric scholar
Kevin Adonis Browne stresses the possibility for subversive adaptation.
Examining Caribbean Internet users’ chatting, blogging, and
video-sharing practices, he illustrates how users adapt everyday
vernacular practices to assert their presence in digital public spaces
that often render them invisible. While his argument relates to
individuals’ everyday encounters online rather than large-scale digital
projects, the parallels he establishes between “a carnivalesque
imperative” and the Internet lend insight into the 2 Cents Movement’s
adaptation of social media to expand the power of total expression in
online environments. Rather than view Caribbean folk cultures in
opposition to digital forms, Browne views the inventiveness of both as
part of what makes them compatible. He demonstrates how communal
vernacular practices easily translate to an online environment because
they emerge from “a history of adaptability” necessary for “those who
have had to find a way or make one when none seemed available.”[^28] For
example, in the colonial era, musicians invented steel pan drumming to
get around the ban on using actual drums, managing to make noise in a
colonial environment that aimed to silence them. Corporate social media
platforms also curtail creative expression through their circumscribed
structures. Such restrictions often reinforce the majority voice, yet
Facebook and Twitter have also proven themselves useful for the growth
of subcultures and movements.

Media scholars have identified how Facebook’s interface encourages users
to adopt neoliberal values. The anthropologist Alex Fattal draws a
connection between a user’s desire to gain as many likes and friends as
possible and Facebook’s corporate desire to become the most dominant
social network in the world, characterizing this as “the unspoken logic
of accumulation and curiosity that undergirds” the platform.[^29] To
what extent can this “logic of accumulation and curiosity,” which sounds
eerily similar to older imperial impulses, be disrupted? By using social
media to augment their performance events, the 2 Cents Movement
intercepts this logic of accumulation by bringing users into the dynamic
of total expression. While scholars often critique Facebook for
weakening face-to-face sociality, the 2 Cents Movement reveals how it
can be used to deepen social connections.[^30]

Through social media, poets in the 2 Cents Movement also make their
performances part of everyday life. People browse Facebook as they ride
the bus to work or as they wait in line at the grocery store. The 2
Cents Movement often depicts the performance dynamics of such quotidian
spaces in its studio-produced video poems available on YouTube. For
example, its most popular video-poem, “[Maxi Man Tracking School
Gyal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OA8eLoPylU)” (originally titled
“Yankee’s Gone”), by Crystal Skeete, takes place on a Curepe street and
on a bus.[^31] Skeete addresses her concern about adult males sexually
preying on underage schoolgirls by writing a poem in the voice of a
teenage girl who refuses their advances. Similar to earlier women poets
such as Miss Lou and Jean “Binta” Breeze, she uses the dramatic
monologue to give a voice to women who are denied respect in the public
sphere. Through social media, her video becomes even more impactful
because a viewer might be in that particular social space as she watches
the poem and even be witnessing what Skeete describes. This restores an
important aspect of Caribbean oral traditions, in which yard
performances blend into everyday practices rather than become isolated
special events. Miss Lou had a similar aim in her market women poems,
yet her ability to connect her audience to her settings was often
restrained by the artifice of the theater stage. By creating a tangible
bond between the real-life users and the mediated voices in the poems,
the 2 Cents Movement invites users to do more than merely “like” its
status updates and continue scrolling.

{% include interactive.html
			type="youtube"
			url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/9OA8eLoPylU"
            img="issue01/poet-performing-1.jpg"
            title="2 Cents Project - Crystal Skeete - Maxi Man tracking School Gyal"
            caption="Maxi Man tracking School Gyal" %}

<!-- [![2 Cents Project- Crystal Skeete- Maxi Man tracking School Gyal](/images/issue01/maxi-man-youtube.png)](https://www.youtube.com/embed/9OA8eLoPylU?autoplay=1) -->

In addition to the microblogging of performances, the 2 Cents Movement’s
video poems, like Skeete’s “Maxi Man,” demonstrate how audiovisual
recording technologies can be used to enhance the communal dynamic of
total expression. The videos challenge the idea that poetry depends on
print publication, since many of the movement’s well-known poems are
available only in this format. By getting us off the page, the
videography expands the possibilities for how we might edit and archive
performance poetry. Released in 2013, Skeete’s video went viral on
social media and received more than 88,000 views on YouTube. Her poem
exemplifies the 2 Cents Movement’s approach, in that she initially
attended one of its workshops as a medical student and is now a leading
poet in the movement. She won the 2013 Verses poetry slam with her
performance of this poem; however, the popular version on the 2 Cents
Movement’s YouTube channel is a studio recording made by BeatOven
Productions, with videography by Denithy. Rather than aim to recreate
the experience of the live performance event, the video invites the
viewer to feel included in the street scene being depicted. Through
their synthesis of the dramatic monologue form and the music video
genre, Skeete and the 2 Cents Movement team cultivate a sense of
audience connection and encourage dialogue beyond the space of the poem.

{% include image.html
            img="issue01/maxi-man-cast.jpg"
            title="Maxi man cast"
            caption="Maxi man cast" %} 

<!-- ![Maxi man cast](/images/issue01/maxi-man-cast.jpg) -->

Skeete dresses in a government school uniform to play her character in
the video. Her embodiment of the character creates a dialogic
relationship between her persona and her words because her recitation
critiques the behavior that she acts out. The dramatic monologue’s
implied addressee is another high school girl who is swayed by a maxi
man’s advances. The speaker warns her that “these free rides are going
to end in horror / trust me / with that nine-month sentence things does
go sour.”[^32] Skeete’s conversational style, enhanced by the video
editing and camera angles, encourage the viewer to feel as though Skeete
is speaking directly to her. Standing in the middle of the street,
Skeete begins with the lines, “Posing on every street corner / this is
the resurrection of ‘Jean and Dinah’ / . . . / No Yankees here / only
maxi man conductor.” Referencing Mighty Sparrow’s calypso hit “Jean and
Dinah,” about how the presence of a World War II US army base led to
prostitution in Trinidad, Skeete draws attention to how girls getting
free bus rides from maxi men for sexual favors re-creates a similar
dynamic. Through an intergenerational call and response, she situates
her poem in the Trinidadian oral tradition. Skeete’s poem exemplifies
how the 2 Cents Movement aims to cultivate a socially conscious form of
learning that values vernacular language and knowledge.

Similar to music videos, Skeete’s recitation alternates between a
voiceover and her character speaking onscreen. By playing with the
boundaries between diegetic and nondiegetic sound, the editing
capitalizes on sound’s permeability, encouraging her virtual audience to
feel a closer connection to her words. Skeete’s voice extends beyond the
boundaries of the video and infiltrates the listening space, collapsing
the distance between the onscreen performance and the audience’s
experience of it, especially if they happen to be in a similar setting.

In the narrative that unfolds, the camera angles accentuate Skeete’s
embodied performance. While conventional music videos often sexually
objectify women’s bodies, the jump cuts between medium shots, medium
long shots, and close-ups (often from a slight low angle) emphasize
Skeete’s power as she dramatizes her character’s self-actualization and
encourages other girls to do the same. Skeete’s words combined with the
camera work challenge the male gaze to create a virtual space of female
community. This reaches its peak when the speaker sits in the back of
the van reciting her critique and a reverse shot depicts the maxi man
gazing at her in the rearview mirror. His gaze is literally reflected
back at him, while the speaker verbally refuses his objectification. In
the middle of the van, a girl flirts with another maxi man. Throughout
the poem, the speaker seems to completely condemn this behavior;
however, the poem ends with a surprise twist. As she gets out of the
maxi man’s van, she tells the audience, “This brown-skinned gyal / going
home and mind she child,” indicating that her advice is based on her own
mistakes with a maxi man. This surprise ending builds the speaker’s
authority—not by separating her from her community but by underscoring
her participation in it—and encourages schoolgirls watching the poem to
trust her advice.

In a live performance of “Maxi Man Tracking School Gyal,” Skeete’s
critique of sexual harassment is likely powerful; however, the video
format allows a viewer to experience with greater clarity the embodied
experience of resisting sexual harassment on the street. For female
viewers who have gone through something similar, the recreation of the
scene and its provocative ending deepens their identification with the
speaker. Like a griot, Skeete speaks for a community of young girls, or
rather speaks with them, since her performance encourages them to bring
their own experiences into their interpretation of the poem.

Unlike many poetry recordings available online, which are taped at live
events, the 2 Cents Movement engages technologies as part of the
artistic composition of the poem through their studio-produced poems. By
borrowing from music videography, they invite us to see performance
archives as something more expansive than as a place to simply store
copies of “original” live events. This moves us beyond what Jonathan
Sterne characterizes as the preoccupation with fidelity, which
advertisers established early on in sound reproduction history. Sterne
reveals how “sound fidelity is a story that we tell ourselves to staple
separate sonic realities together.” It maintains the illusion of
“reproduced sound as a mediation of ‘live’ sounds;” however, “the
‘medium’ does not necessarily mediate, authenticate, dilute, or extend a
preexisting social relation.”[^33] Rather than view archives only as
spaces to preserve former instances of total expression, we should also
view them as an opportunity to engender new forms of it. Rather than use
recording technologies to recover or preserve a lost history of the
voice, we can use them to actively construct a history of the voice—to
create a sonic reality in which new social relations can take shape.

## Redesigning Internet Audio Archives for Caribbean Poetry

The 2 Cents Movement’s do-it-yourself approach to digitizing poetry
illustrates that a lot can be accomplished by adapting existing
platforms and with limited resources; however, the underrepresentation
of Caribbean poetry online will not be solved solely through social
media and the “free culture” of the Internet. Merely uploading more
poems to YouTube will not be enough to overcome the structural biases
that silence (and drown out) Caribbean performance poetry online. As
Rick Prelinger establishes, YouTube has become, “in the eyes of the
public, the default online moving-image archive.” [^34] Yet it lacks
many of the defining characteristics of archives that make them
valuable, such as a focus on long-term preservation and “strictly
codified lines of conduct” that have been carefully developed through
academic practice and intellectual debate.[^35] The underrepresentation
of Caribbean poetry in Internet audio archives is also symptomatic of
the global digital divide, which is especially acute for
Africa-descended populations.[^36] However, as Curwen Best points out,
“The flip side to the notion of the digital divide is therefore the
formation of strategic space. It is this strategic space that opens up
an area and arena of knowledge about evolving technologies.”[^37] To
take advantage of “this strategic space,” this section of the essay
evaluates the standards and practices that have been established by
existing Internet audio archives and considers how a Caribbean poetry
collection could be organized to realize total expression.

A discussion about archiving poetry recordings would be incomplete
without a consideration of the achievements of
[PennSound](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/). As the leading US
collection, it has quickly become the standard for how to create a
Web-based poetry audio archive. University of Pennsylvania professors
Charles Bernstein and Al Filreis started the collection in 2003
primarily for classroom use. It holds over 45,000 poetry recordings,
available for free streaming and download. The files are downloaded
roughly four million times a month.[^38] For poetry, this number is
astounding, when one considers the limited print runs and book sales for
contemporary poetry. Although US poets and avant-garde aesthetics tend
to predominate, the site has author pages for some prominent Caribbean
poets, including
[Brathwaite](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Brathwaite.php) and
[M. NourbeSe Philip](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Philip.php).
It also holds some of the few [Louise
Bennett](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Bennett.php) recordings
available online.[^39] The site uses the following archival taxonomies:
authors, series, anthologies, collections, groups, and classics, which
provide the user with a variety of ways to study a poet’s work. The
[PennSound Manifesto](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/manifesto.php)
is worth examining because it has set the precedent for subsequent
Internet poetry collections. Bernstein provides the following criteria
for poetry audio: “It must be free and downloadable”; “It must be MP3 or
better”; “It must be singles”; “It must be named”; “It must embed
bibliographic information in the file”; and “It must be indexed.” These
criteria have proved successful in terms of encouraging widespread use,
particularly on college campuses. PennSound archives each poem
individually (rather than entire events) because this makes poems easier
to find, access, and download, and it allows listeners to create their
own playlists. In Bernstein’s own words, PennSound adapts “a
consumer-oriented MP3 file exchange approach” for a nonprofit
library.[^40] By embedding bibliographic information in the file and
naming each one, it upholds archival standards and ensures that future
researchers will have access to information about the context for the
recording, something a social media platform like YouTube does not
always provide. PennSound’s straightforward interface, which lets users
select from an alphabetized list of authors, also erases implicit
hierarchies that come from the emphasis on accumulation in social media
sites where voices are forced to compete with each other for likes and
views.

While PennSound’s open-access model holds a lot of potential for
Caribbean performance poetry, its prioritizing of free resources may not
be as easy to achieve for Caribbean poetry. An extreme example of this
free culture ethos is represented by Kenneth Goldsmith, the founder of
[UBUweb](http://www.ubuweb.com), who for a while maintained a page on
the site called the “Wall of Shame”: he would publically condemn any
artist who asked for her work to be removed from the site by writing her
name on the wall.[^41] Unlike Goldsmith, PennSound strives to ensure
that all of its recordings are “cleared for copyright to be distributed
free for noncommercial and educational purposes.” While this democratic
and anticapitalistic approach may seem appealing for Caribbean poetry,
in practice it may be more difficult to implement, particularly for
poets who view performance as a central part of their artistic
production. In the manifesto, Bernstein states that the debates about
file sharing in the music industry do not apply to poetry: “One of the
advantages of working with poetry sound files is that we don't
anticipate a problem with rights. At present and in the conceivable
future, there is no profit to be gained by the sale of recorded
poetry.”[^42] Yet Caribbean poets such as Mutabaruka and Linton Kwesi
Johnson built their careers through their affiliation with the reggae
recording industry and make money from the sales of their albums. The 2
Cents Movement offers its recordings for free; however, as a group of
younger poets, the members may be more willing to share their work
online to build their reputation.

The subject of copyright and fair use for Caribbean performance poetry
is a complex issue that deserves its own treatment in a separate essay.
In terms of the current discussion, it offers another example of the
persistence of print-centrism in poetry scholarship. The emphasis on
free recordings implicitly upholds the idea that the artistic labor of
poetry is more worthy of payment when it is print based. Moreover, it
demonstrates how we define poems as texts rather than as performances.
The Poetry Foundation’s [*Code for Best Practices in Fair Use for
Poetry*](http://www.poetryfoundation.org/foundation/bestpractices)
underscores this point. A group of poets, editors, and publishers met at
the Poetry Foundation’s Harriet Monroe Poetry Institute and collaborated
with American University’s Center for Social Media and its Washington
College of Law in 2011 to create the guide. Although they outline their
purpose as “identifying obstacles preventing poetry from coming fully
into new media and, where possible, imagining how to remove or mitigate
these obstacles,” almost none of their examples involve poetry
audio.[^43] Yet for Caribbean poets, a major stumbling block to “coming
fully into new media” is a clear set of fair use practices for
performance-based work. In the section “Poetry Online,” the examples
pertain to the appearance of text on websites. The document concludes
with the section “Literary Performance;” however, it addresses only
poets who incorporate poems by other artists into their readings. This
document becomes completely irrelevant for groups like the 2 Cents
Movement, whose members often do not produce text versions of their
poems.

This print-centrism also extends to the design of audio collections. I
agree with Kate Eichhorn, who argues that most poetry sound archives
(both digital and analog) have yet to realize the potential of archiving
sound because of “the widely held assumption \[in literary studies\]
that the archive is necessarily a space of writing and, hence, opposed
to speech and other performative acts.” Eichhorn proposes that we need
“to create a sound archive designed to recover and preserve the
embodied, interactive, and present nature of the performed word.” In her
assessment, archived poetry recordings too often become “flat and
lifeless artifacts.”[^44] Although Eichhorn focuses on avant-garde
poets, her arguments apply to Caribbean poets who foreground sound as an
integral part of the poem’s meaning. Such work accessible in an archive
designed to disrupt our text-based conceptions of archival knowledge
would undoubtedly lead us more assertively into other forms of knowing
rather than allow the digital to reconsolidate print paradigms.

One notable exception to the underrepresentation of anglophone Caribbean
poets in Internet audio collections is the [Poetry
Archive](http://www.poetryarchive.org/), supported by the Arts Council
of England. This site features more Caribbean poets than most, because
the [Caribbean Poetry Project](http://caribbeanpoetry.educ.cam.ac.uk/)—a
group of scholars and poets from the Cambridge University Faculty of
Education, the Centre for Commonwealth Education, and the University of
the West Indies—collaborated with the Poetry Archive to improve
access.[^45] Of 476 poets, 23 are from the Caribbean region. While this
is not a huge percentage, it is considerably more than most sites, and
every Caribbean poet page has sound recordings that can be streamed for
free or downloaded for a fee of £0.89. The Poetry Archive, like many
Internet audio archives, specializes in classroom resources. It has a
special page for [teaching Caribbean
poetry](http://www.poetryarchive.org/collection/caribbean-poetry-0),
with a selection of sound recordings and a [guide to the language of
Caribbean
poetry](http://www.poetryarchive.org/articles/guide-language-caribbean-poetry).[^46]
The Caribbean Poetry Project’s work with the Poetry Archive demonstrates
how cross-disciplinary and cross-institutional collaborations help to
break down Anglo-centrism.

Yet analyzing the design of the Poetry Archive author pages reveals that
we need to do more than simply add voices to existing archives. As Amy
Earhart cautions, for digital recovery projects for writers of color to
be successful, we also must “theorize the technological with the same
rigor as we theorize the content.”[^47] If one compares the recording of
Linton Kwesi Johnson reciting “[Di Great
Insohreckshan](http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/di-great-insohreckshan)”
on the Poetry Archive with a [YouTube
recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IUNQS7Pwwu4) of him
performing it at an outdoor festival in Venezuela in 2008, the total
expression feels much more resonant in the YouTube version than on the
Poetry Archive site.[^48] I make this comparison to illustrate how the
design of the Poetry Archive page mutes the insurrectionary tone of
Johnson’s poem about the Brixton Riots, not to demonstrate that the
YouTube platform is inherently better at representing total expression.
Obviously, the YouTube video allows the viewer to see Johnson’s body and
facial expressions, which is not possible with the Poetry Archive audio
recording, but it is not as simple as video versus audio. Although the
sound quality of the video lacks the clarity of the Poetry Archive
recording, the uneven audio levels provide a more authentic experience
of what hearing this poem in a large crowd at an outdoor festival would
feel like. The spontaneity of live performances, including sound
glitches and background noise, becomes part of what Brathwaite
characterizes as the “sonority contrasts” of total expression.[^49] As
Eichhorn points out, “These intruders are precisely what sound
technicians often seek to filter out as they prepare recordings for the
archive.”[^50] The Poetry Archive version of “Di Great Insohreckshan”
follows the predominant sound-editing style for Internet audio archives.
Martin Spinelli describes this style as “the seamless edit,” designed to
highlight the poet’s voice and minimize all other distractions,
including the recording scene (whether live or in-studio) and the
“material elements of their production.”[^51]

In addition to using conventional sound editing, [Johnson’s author
page](http://www.poetryarchive.org/poet/linton-kwesi-johnson) follows
the standard visual design that can be found on the Poetry Archive as
well as on other online poetry collections such as PennSound. His page
features an author portrait (rather than a performance action shot), a
biography, and links to individual poem tracks. Beneath the poem title
and author name, one can click the Play button and listen to the
recording. The Poetry Archive uses a simple audio player that allows a
listener to start, pause, and stop the track. Johnson’s author biography
explains that his poems on the site were recorded from live performances
and come from his CD *LKJ A Cappella Live*. Despite the claim that “the
energy of his live recitals gives the recordings a unique electricity,
interspersed with the laughter and applause of audiences around Europe,”
the seamless editing of “Di Great Insohreckshan” allows one to listen to
Johnson’s entire recitation before realizing that it is a live
performance.[^52] Once the poem ends, the only audible audience noises
are a cough and polite applause that slowly fades out. Rather than
convey “a unique electricity,” the cough suggests a subdued audience who
tried to remain silent until the end of the performance. The page
provides no information about the specifics of the event or who the
European audience was, although it sounds as though it might have been a
poetry reading in an academic setting. The track certainly holds no
trace of a communal “dub consciousness.”[^53] By not clearly identifying
the track as a single performance, the archive presents it as the
authoritative audio version. In the left-hand margin, under the heading
“About the Poem,” it lists the themes as “social, unrest, race, and
Caribbean” but provides no information about the Brixton Riots.

Derek Furr notes that while online poetry collections devote attention
to different aesthetics, what unites them is the idea that hearing a
poet voice her own work is crucial to understanding the poem. Yet
despite the interest in vocalization, collections tend to downplay the
setting of the poet’s performance by providing little information about
when and where the reading occurred and why this particular event was
recorded.[^54] While certain sites, such as PennSound, make sure that
all of the bibliographic info is embedded in the single file with
accurate metadata, often all that this provides is the date and physical
location of the reading. By divorcing the poem from its contextual
setting, this approach erases the reciprocal relationship between the
poet and her audience. Furr proposes that poetry recordings (both live
and in-studio) become valuable because “when we close listen, we hear
not only the sounds of the poem and the poet’s voicing of them, but also
the echoes of previous scenes of reading and listening.”[^55] Through
webpage design and sound editing, the Poetry Archive downplays the
previous audiences of “Di Great Insohreckshan” so that the online user
feels as though she is the only person in the audience. While the 2
Cents Movement illustrates how cinematic approaches can be used to
deepen total expression, the Johnson example illustrates the value of
preserving the ephemeral qualities of a live performance in a recording
to enrich the listening experience. Furr borrows Charles Bernstein’s
term *close listening* to characterize how a user should engage with
audio recordings. Based on his experience with PennSound, Bernstein
proposes close listening as an alternative to close reading, where one
prioritizes the materiality of sound and the aural experience.[^56] Yet,
in practice, how much does close listening on Internet audio archives
actually deviate from close reading?

Annie Murray and Jared Wiercinski, curators of
[SpokenWeb](http://spokenweb.ca/), a collection of recordings of a
Montreal poetry reading series from 1966 to 1977, point out that while
most Internet audio archives make listening the focus, their structure
makes them multimodal.[^57] Accordingly, they stress that the visual
elements of online poetry archives need careful consideration. They
explore “what kinds of site navigation, audio visualization, design
elements and functionalities could be offered by a Web-based spoken word
interface, and how these might enhance the listening process and,
ultimately, the scholarly endeavor.” [^58] Because very little
scholarship exists on how people engage with sounded poems, they
acknowledge that their suggestions for “a sound archive ‘recipe’ that
other cultural heritage institutions can follow” are based on
established reading practices.[^59] They make some helpful suggestions,
including using a waveform display for sound visualization, and
providing listeners with a media player that allows them more control
over the playback. They also suggest incorporating any available images
and videos of the performance event, much like the 2 Cents Movement’s
photo documentation on Twitter and Facebook. However, other suggestions
such as tethering audio playback with a written transcript keep the
primary focus on reading rather than listening.[^60] For example, on the
Poetry Archive site, beneath the link to play “Di Great Insohreckshan,”
one can also click on the link “Read This Poem.” This encourages
scholars to engage in what is, for many, the more familiar interpretive
practice rather than to develop new modes of analysis based on sound. In
digital archives, Bernstein suggests that “poems, set adrift from their
visual grounding in alphabetic texts, might begin to resemble the songs
from which, for so long, they have been divided.”[^61] However, to
achieve this we need to (1) be wary of a one-size-fits-all approach, and
(2) carefully design visual elements to encourage sonic engagement
rather than to reify a visual economy of text. Such a divide between
song and poem has never existed for anglophone Caribbean performance
poets, yet colonial legacies continue to dictate that we read rather
than listen to this work.

Even when one is listening only, Internet audio archives often recreate
the feeling of reading alone. Clicking on the link and listening to the
poem while one looks at the author portrait (similar to the style found
on book jackets) mimics the experience of solitary reading, where one
feels in private conversation with the author. Simple audio players that
have only a linear time-lapse bar (rather than a more complex waveform
display) encourage the eyes to move from right to left, as they do in
the act of reading. When a poem is presented as a decontextualized
single track, a listener is encouraged to adopt a new critical approach
and treat the poem as a self-contained object. Listening, like reading,
becomes “an isolated, individualistic expression” rather than a communal
endeavor.[^62] Sound reproduction technologies have also encouraged our
hearing to become more individualistic. Using headphones as his example,
Sterne argues that such devices encourage listening to be “more
orientated toward constructs of private space and private property,”
which encourages “sound to become a commodity.”[^63]

In contrast, the 2 Cents Movement recreates the communal experience of
listening to a poem, which is a key part of total expression. Photo
tweets and poetry videos make online members a participatory audience.
We have much work to do to figure out how to build Internet audio
archives that recreate this communal experience of listening.
Everything—including sound editing, interface, database design,
navigation system, and copyright issues—needs careful consideration to
realize the digital potential of total expression. To embark on this
work, it is crucial that we turn to the poets themselves and build on
their education legacies.

So much of the history of the voice has already been lost, or muted, by
the ongoing colonial bias toward nation language as well as limited
resources and funding. Caribbean poetry recordings that survive, buried
in dusty boxes in attics and library storage rooms, sit silently waiting
for new audiences to return to them “the noise and sounds that the maker
makes.”[^64] Since these reel-to-reel tapes, cassettes, eight tracks,
CDs, and LPs are fragile media, threatened by technological obsolescence
and (sometimes) the tropical Caribbean climate, we must make digitizing
this vital record of Caribbean poetry history a priority.

---

[^1]: Edward Kamau Brathwaite, *History of the Voice: The Development of
    Nation Language in Anglophone Caribbean Poetry* (London: New Beacon,
    1984), 13.

[^2]: See writing.upenn.edu/pennsound; www.poetryarchive.org;
    www.poetryfoundation.org; www.poets.org; and www.ubuweb.com.

[^3]: See “PennSound Transforms How Poetry Is Taught the World Over,”
    *Penn News*, 26 June 2014,
    www.upenn.edu/pennnews/news/pennsound-transforms-how-poetry-taught-world-over.

[^4]: For a discussion of race in digital canons, see Amy E. Earhart,
    “Can Information Be Unfettered? Race and the New Digital Humanities
    Canon,” in Mathew K. Gold, ed., *Debates in the Digital Humanities*
    (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012); open-access
    edition,
    [dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu)/debates/text/16.
    Earhart urges that “we need to examine the canon that we, as digital
    humanists, are constructing, a canon that skews toward traditional
    texts and excludes crucial work by women, people of color, and the
    GLBTQ community” (para. 17).

[^5]: Laurence A. Breiner, “The Half-Life of Performance Poetry,”
    *Journal of West Indian Literature* 8, no. 1 (1998): 20.

[^6]: See twitter.com/2CentsMovement;
    www.facebook.com/The2CentsMovement; and
    www.youtube.com/user/TheTwoCentsMovement.

[^7]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 13.

[^8]: Linton Kwesi Johnson, “Reggae Sounds,” in *Mi Revalueshanary Fren*
    (Keene, NY: Ausable, 2006), 15; listen at
    www.youtube.com/watch?v=8omA7huF6XE.

[^9]: Here I draw on Diana Taylor’s analysis of what she calls the
    repertoire to characterize how performance acts create cultural
    memory in the Americas. See Diana Taylor, *The Archive and the
    Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the Americas* (Durham, NC:
    Duke University Press, 2003).

[^10]: Oku Onuora, quoted in Mervyn Morris, *Is English We Speaking, and
    Other Essays* (Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers, 1999), 38.

[^11]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 18–19 (italics in original).

[^12]: Ibid., 49.

[^13]: Jonathan Sterne, *The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound
    Reproduction* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003), 22.

[^14]: Hugh Hodges, “Poetry and Overturned Cars: Why Performance Poetry
    Can’t Be Studied (and Why We Should Study It Anyway),” in Susan
    Gingell and Wendy Roy, eds., *Listening Up, Writing Down, and
    Looking Beyond: Interfaces of the Oral, Written, and Visual*
    (Waterloo, ON: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2012), 98.

[^15]: As Phelan describes, “Performance’s only life is in the present.
    Performance cannot be saved, recorded, documented, or otherwise
    participate in the circulation of representations of
    representations: once it does so, it becomes something other than
    performance.” Peggy Phelan, *Unmarked: The Politics of Performance*
    (New York: Routledge, 1993), 146.

[^16]: Sterne, *The Audible Past*, 20.

[^17]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 49.

[^18]: Charles Bernstein, ed., *Close Listening: Poetry and the
    Performed Word* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 8.

[^19]: For a discussion about the neglect of sound analysis in digital
    literary studies, see Tanya Clement et al., “Sounding for Meaning:
    Using Theories of Knowledge Representation to Analyze Aural Patterns
    in Texts,” *Digital Humanities Quarterly* 7, no. 1 (2013),
    www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000146/000146.html.

[^20]: Although I do not have the space in this essay to explore their
    work, studying the standards and practices developed by music
    historians for online collections such as the [Naxos Music
    Library](https://www.naxosmusiclibrary.com/home.asp?rurl=%2Fdefault%2Easp)
    would be another fruitful line of inquiry to help literary scholars
    move beyond text-based approaches. See
    www.naxosmusiclibrary.com/home.asp?rurl=%2Fdefault%2Easp.

[^21]: While there are Caribbean sound archives, such as
    [RadioHaiti](http://radiohaitilives.com), in Caribbean literary
    studies print archiving is much more prevalent. For example, major
    collections such as the [Digital Library of the
    Caribbean](http://www.dloc.com), while excellent, primarily hold
    literary materials converted from print documents. See
    radiohaitilives.com and www.dloc.com.

[^22]: Jean Claude Cournand, quoted in Bobie-lee Dixon, “Not Afraid to
    Put In Their ‘2 Cents,’” *Trinidad and Tobago Guardian*, 16 July
    2013,
    www.guardian.co.tt/entertainment/2013-07-15/not-afraid-put-their-‘2-cents’.

[^23]: Verses was recently renamed the First Citizens National Poetry
    Slam.

[^24]: “Logie Tops School’s Spoken Word ‘Intercol,’” *Trinidad and
    Tobago Guardian*, 2 April 2015,
    www.guardian.co.tt/lifestyle/2015-04-01/logie-tops-schools-spoken-word-‘intercol’;
    “The Spoken Word Intercol Champion,” *Bocas News*,
    www.bocaslitfest.com/2015/the-spoken-word-intercol-champion-is.

[^25]: See
    www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLsZJUoc\_yr1ufNZGIsFg74Fl3yuZTNU9k.

[^26]: See twitter.com/2CentsMovement. See also the individual albums on
    2 Cents Movement’s Facebook page, where some of the school tour
    photos are collected; for example, see the album “Five Rivers
    Sec—Speak Out Tour 2014—Day 27,”
    www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.610565055739844.1073741948.125245237605164&type=3.
    For information on the current Courts Bocas Speak Out Tour, see
    www.bocaslitfest.com/courts-bocas-speak-out.

[^27]: Dhiraj Murthy, *Twitter: Social Communication in the Twitter Age*
    (Cambridge: Polity, 2013), 39.

[^28]: Kevin Adonis Browne, *Tropic Tendencies: Rhetoric, Popular
    Culture, and the Anglophone Caribbean* (Pittsburgh: University of
    Pittsburgh Press, 2013), 129, 134.

[^29]: Alex Fattal, “Facebook: Corporate Hackers, a Billion Users, and
    the Geo-politics of the ‘Social Graph,’” *Anthropological Quarterly*
    85, no. 3 (2012): 931. See also Ilana Gershon, “Un-friend My Heart:
    Facebook, Promiscuity, and Heartbreak in a Neoliberal Age,”
    *Anthropological Quarterly* 84, no. 4 (2011): 865–94.

[^30]: For a critique of Facebook as a community-building form, see José
    Marichal, *Facebook Democracy: The Architecture of Disclosure and
    the Threat to Public Life* (Abingdon, UK: Ashgate, 2012).

[^31]: Crystal Skeete, “Maxi Man Tracking School Gyal,” YouTube video,
    5:27, posted by the 2 Cents Movement, 25 June 2013,
    www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OA8eLoPylU.

[^32]: I transcribed the quotations from a recording; any inaccuracies
    are mine.

[^33]: Sterne, *The Audible Past*, 219, 218, 226.

[^34]: Rick Prelinger, “The Appearance of Archives,” in Pelle Snickars
    and Patrick Vonderau, eds., *The YouTube Reader* (Stockholm:
    National Library of Sweden, 2009), 269.

[^35]: Frank Kessler and Mirko Tobias Schäfer, “Navigating YouTube:
    Constituting a Hybrid Information Management System,” in Snickars
    and Vonderau, *The YouTube Reader*, 277.

[^36]: Mary F. E. Ebeling, “The New Dawn: Black Agency in Cyberspace,”
    *Radical History Review*, no. 87 (Fall 2003): 98. For a discussion
    of the global digital divide, see Pippa Norris, *Digital Divide:
    Civic Engagement, Information Poverty, and the Internet Worldwide*
    (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).

[^37]: Curwen Best, *The Politics of Caribbean Cyberculture* (New York:
    Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), 4.

[^38]: Tanya Barrientos, “Penn’s Rich Poetry Legacy,” *Penn Current*, 20
    May 2010,
    www.upenn.edu/pennnews/current/2010-05-20/features/penn’s-rich-poetry-legacy.

[^39]: See writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Brathwaite.php;
    writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Philip.php; and
    writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Bennett.php.

[^40]: Charles Bernstein, “PennSound Manifesto,” PennSound, 2003,
    writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/manifesto.php.

[^41]: Astra Taylor, *The People’s Platform: Taking Back Power and
    Culture in the Digital Age* (New York: Picador, 2014), 153.

[^42]: Bernstein, “PennSound Manifesto.”

[^43]: Center for Social Media and the Poetry Foundation, *Code for Best
    Practices in Fair Use for Poetry* (Washington, DC: American
    University, 2011),
    [www.poetryfoundation.org/foundation/bestpractices](http://www.poetryfoundation.org/foundation/bestpractices).

[^44]: Kate Eichhorn, “Past Performance, Present Dilemma: A Poetics of
    Archiving Sound,” *Mosaic* 42, no. 1 (2009): 187, 190, 184.

[^45]: See caribbeanpoetry.educ.cam.ac.uk.

[^46]: See www.poetryarchive.org/collection/caribbean-poetry-0; and
    www.poetryarchive.org/articles/guide-language-caribbean-poetry.

[^47]: Earhart, “Can Information Be Unfettered?,”
    [dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu)/debates/text/16,
    para. 15.

[^48]: Linton Kwesi Johnson, “Di Great Insohreckshan,”
    www.poetryarchive.org/poem/di-great-insohreckshan. Johnson, “Di
    Great Insohreckshan,” YouTube video, 2:00, posted by Oscar David De
    Barros, 25 January 2013, www.youtube.com/watch?v=IUNQS7Pwwu4.

[^49]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 46.

[^50]: Eichhorn, “Past Performance, Present Dilemma,” 190.

[^51]: Martin Spinelli, “Analog Echoes: A Poetics of Digital Audio
    Editing,” *Object 10: Cyberpoetics* (2002): 36; *UbuWeb Papers*, 16
    May 2007, www.ubu.com/papers/object/06\_spinelli.pdf. Spinelli
    criticizes poetry sound editing for being too influenced by
    traditional radio theory, questioning why most archived poetry
    recordings present sound as though it were a linear medium by using
    “the seamless, invisible, inaudible edit which dislodges nothing,
    which interrupts nothing, which is in fact deployed to remove
    interruption, to remove digression and to clarify” (36).

[^52]: Linton Kwesi Johnson author page at the Poetry Archive,
    www.poetryarchive.org/poet/linton-kwesi-johnson (accessed 23 July
    2015).

[^53]: Onuora, quoted in Morris, *Is English We Speaking*, 38.

[^54]: Derek Furr, *Recorded Poetry and Poetic Reception from Edna
    Millay to the Circle of Robert Lowell* (New York: Palgrave
    Macmillan, 2010), 5.

[^55]: Ibid., 149.

[^56]: See Bernstein, *Close Listening*, 3–26.

[^57]: See spokenweb.ca.

[^58]: Annie Murray and Jared Wiercinski, “Looking at Archival Sound:
    Enhancing the Listening Experience in a Spoken Word Archive,” *First
    Monday* 17, no. 4 (2012),
    firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3808/3197.

[^59]: Annie Murray and Jared Wiercinski, “A Design Methodology for
    Web-based Sound Archives,” *DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly* 8,
    no. 2 (2014),
    digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/8/2/000173/000173.html\#p6.

[^60]: For a summary of their specific suggestions for visual design,
    see Murray and Wiercinski, “Looking at Archival Sound.”

[^61]: Charles Bernstein, “Making Audio Visible: The Lessons of Visual
    Language for the Textualization of Sound,” *Textual Practice* 23,
    no. 6 (2009): 966, doi:10.1080/09502360903361550.

[^62]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 18.

[^63]: Sterne, *The Audible Past*, 24.

[^64]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 18–19.
