---
layout: review
section: reviews
title: 
  "long": "A Review of \"A Colony in Crisis\""
  "short": Review
author: 
- name: Anne Eller
  shortname: Eller
date: May 2016
issue: 1
---

[*A Colony in Crisis*](https://colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/)*: The
Saint-Domingue Grain Shortage of 1789*, a collection of “translated and
curated primary sources from an episode in the History of
Saint-Domingue,” is a digital exhibition that addresses a colonial
flashpoint: the moment when failed grain harvests in France fueled
escalating political tensions between white planters in Saint-Domingue
and political elites in the metropole.[^1] The site’s authors, Abby
Broughton, Kelsey Corlett-Rivera, and Nathan Dize, in consultation with
an interdisciplinary team of experts, aim to represent the relationship
between France and Saint-Domingue in a more dialogic fashion than is
traditionally depicted in French accounts. They highlight the
fundamental conflicts between the financial interests of planters and
the trade monopolies of the metropole, revealing positions that amount
to discourses of permanent complaint.[^2]

The introduction to one of the documents refers to a “potential famine”
and calls the grain “much needed,” echoing the language of the 1780s
planter supplicants who spoke of a “*fear* of a food shortage.”[^3]
However, it is important to note that despite a production shortage in
France, there was no grain shortage in the colony of Saint-Domingue. Any
potential shortfall threatened exclusively the consumption of a small
planter minority, and, in fact, the colony’s intendant denied any threat
to planter diets at all when he defended his own actions.[^4] Of all the
colony-side missives gathered in *Colony in Crisis*, only two address
food supplies for the enslaved, although a helpful linked article
suggests that other petitions often did so, albeit in a nakedly
utilitarian manner.[^5] These colony-side writers admit that the
enslaved were not receiving these grain foodstuffs and blandly suggest,
in the course of their broader arguments, a meager allotment well out of
proportion with their population.[^6] Pamphleteers based in France, on
the other hand, take only a passing stab at addressing slave provisions.
A single pamphlet offers (imprecise) estimates of the number of enslaved
people working on coffee plantations, arguing (speciously) that food
production there adequately supplied individuals enslaved on sugar
plantations (a number they in turn minimized). The pamphleteers’ vague
numeracy serves only to mislead, and most of the elite writers whose
letters are reproduced in *Colony in Crisis* avoid specifics altogether,
not out of yet another instance of willful elision but because enslaved
men, women, and children were not consuming these grains.[^7]

In sum, the crisis was not about Saint-Domingue’s foodstuffs in any
substantive way, even if the corruption, hoarding, and monopolies of
high-level merchants and the intendant might have made local planters
feel frustrated and even temporarily food-insecure for their own
households. Instead, planters used France’s grain crisis as a flashpoint
to try to break the metropole’s economic monopoly and engage in regional
trade. The planters wanted not only to seek nearby supplies but also,
crucially, to benefit from an expanded market for Saint-Domingue’s cash
crops. Free ports, opened through the guise of supply trade, would have
unleashed Dominguan coffee and sugar to eager nearby markets,
particularly the United States, and free ports would furthermore easily
have concealed trade in many other products. American flour offered a
Trojan vessel for reduced oversight. Deregulation would have had
widespread effects, including diminished importance of France, as the
pamphleteers acknowledged.[^8] The two elite groups speak past each
other, highlighting intransigent differences over high-level policy.
Authors in France invoke interimperial rivalry with Britain, even as
colonial planters are far more concerned with engagement to their
immediate north, with the United States.[^9] Both elite groups were
frustrated with each other, and the point-counterpoint structure of
*Colony in Crisis* helps users understand the intransigence of each
position, even a few months after revolutionary fighting began on French
soil.[^10]

Several documents selected for issue 2.0 of *Colony in Crisis* seek “to
provide a larger, transnational context for . . . 1789
Saint-Domingue,”[^11] and they succeed in highlighting promising new
avenues of expansion for the site’s collection. Two pamphlets in
particular offer a regional view of French administrative questions in
the Caribbean, pointing to new directions of inquiry: the functioning
and life of regional ports, regional foodways, and intra-Caribbean
traffic, more generally.[^12] The scholars aver that their initial goal
for *Colony in Crisis* was to “speak to the conditions of the slaves,
wealthy and poor planters, free people of color, and the reactions to
the system of slavery in mainland France” and that this goal was
unmanageably broad.[^13] In these transcolonial documents, however, the
authors provide a scaffold for just such a growing dialogue.

University of Maryland pamphlets figure prominently in the first two
issues of *Colony in Crisis*, and these documents have been curated,
translated, and contextualized for a wide audience of academics,
students, and the general public.[^14] An annotated table of contents
(found under the tab for translations) offers helpful orientation, and
each entry benefits from a longer introduction on its own page, where
the French document is linked in its entirety from [Internet
Archive](https://archive.org/index.php), and the authors offer a
five-hundred- to seven-hundred-word English translation. The site is
eminently accessible for and welcoming to new users and is also well
designed, with built-in link redundancies for excellent navigation
between documents, explanations, and the rest of the project.

*Colony in Crisis* calls attention to a wealth of printed resources
currently housed in separate physical institutions, and it succeeds
brilliantly in making them accessible to scholars of varying interests
and levels of engagement. One can easily see how another pamphlet series
might, for example, include
[texts](https://archive.org/details/ideadelvalordel00valvgoog) from
Saint-Domingue’s immediate cattle-trading neighbor, Santo Domingo.[^15]
Another challenge might be how resources from this “rich print culture”
could be gathered alongside other more fragmentary text sources, oral
histories, and sound studies.[^16] Or the impressive board of advisors
for *Colony in Crisis* could bring context to a wide variety of sources
and could also bring to new audiences the ongoing vibrant debates about
the [archive](http://socialtext.dukejournals.org/content/33/4_125.toc)
itself.[^17] These discussions would inevitably more thoroughly engage
the lived experience of the enslaved men, women, and children who made
up the majority of Saint-Domingue as the colony confronted various
crises in the 1780s. That said, even at this present stage of the
project’s development, readers will certainly have a sense of the
magnitude and value of the site, and I look forward to following the
project as it grows.

---

[^1]: *Colony in Crisis*, colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu.

[^2]: See “The Project,” *Colony in Crisis*,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/about.

[^3]: “M. de Cocherel’s reflections, Deputy of Saint-Domingue, on the
    report from the Comité des Six,” 10 November 1789,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1789/11/10/m-de-cocherels-reflections-deputy-of-saint-domingue-on-the-report-from-the-comite-des-six,
    paras. 3 and 1 of the introduction, para. 4 of the translation
    (emphasis mine). The Comte de Reynaud suggests an “eve . . . of
    famine.” “Motion from M. le Comte de Reynaud, Deputy of
    Saint-Domingue at the August 31 Session,” 31 August 189,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1789/08/31/motion-from-m-le-comte-de-reynaud-deputy-of-saint-domingue-at-the-august-31-session,
    para. 6 of the translation. The table of contents for issue 1.0 of
    the translations also echoes this theme, in its phrasing “the grain
    shortages in Saint-Domingue . . . threatened the planters with
    famine and malnutrition.” Annotation to “Ordinance concerning the
    introduction of foreign grain in the warehouse ports of the French
    section of the island of Saint-Domingue,” 27 May 1789,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/category/translations/issue-1-0.

[^4]: While his refutation is not in the English translation on *Colony
    in Crisis*
    (colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1790/02/12/charges-of-fraud-the-obstinate-rebuttal-of-a-banished-intendant-concerning-the-grain-shortage-and-criminal-negligence),
    it is offered in the full text on the Internet Archive; see *Mémoire
    et observations du Sieur Barbé de Marbois, intendant des
    Isles-sous-le-vent en 1786, 1787, 1788, et 1789*,
    archive.org/stream/memoireetobserva00barb\#page/34/mode/2up, 35.

[^5]: Joseph Horan, “The Colonial Famine Plot: Slavery, Free Trade, and
    Empire in the French Atlantic, 1763–1791,” *IRSH* 55 (2010): 103–21.
    Gouy d’Arsy and Reynaud invoked the diet of enslaved people in their
    petitions. “Summary given by M. le Marquis de Gouy d’Arsy,” 9
    September 1789,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1789/09/09/summary-given-by-m-le-marquis-de-gouy-darsy;
    “Motion from M. le Comte de Reynaud.”

[^6]: “Summary given by M. le Marquis de Gouy d’Arsy.”

[^7]: “Response from the Deputies of Production and Commerce of France:
    To the motions of Mm. de Cocherel & de Reynaud, Deputies from the
    Isle of Saint-Domingue to the National Assembly,” 13 September 1789,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1789/09/13/response-from-the-deputies-of-production-and-commerce-of-france.

[^8]: “M. de Cocherel’s Reflections.”

[^9]: “On the state of slaves regarding the prosperity of French
    colonies and their metropole; Address to the nation’s
    representatives,” 17 March 1789,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1789/03/17/on-the-state-of-slaves.

[^10]: “Supplement to the counter argument from the Deputies of French
    Manufacturers and Commerce to the Deputies of Saint-Domingue,
    concerning the supply of provisions to the colony,” 11 November
    1789,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1789/11/11/supplement-to-the-counter-argument-from-the-deputies-of-french-manufacturers-and-commerce-to-the-deputies-of-saint-domingue.

[^11]: “Welcome to A Colony in Crisis,” colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu,
    para. 1, update.

[^12]: “Judgment from the State Council of the King, concerning foreign
    commerce in the French Isles of America,” 30 August 1784,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1784/08/30/judgment-from-the-state-council-of-the-king-concerning-foreign-commerce-in-the-french-isles-of-america-from-august-30-1784;
    “Judgment from the State Council of the King,” 10 September 1789,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/1786/09/10/judgment-from-the-state-council-of-the-king-september-10-1786.

[^13]: “Issue 1.0: Introduction,” *Colony in Crisis*,
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/2014/09/12/issue-1-0-introduction, para.
    1.

[^14]: The university holds twelve thousand French-language pamphlets,
    of which nearly five hundred relate directly to France’s Atlantic
    colonies. See “Revealing La Révolution Team,”
    colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/the-team/revealing-la-revolution-team.
    See also “Q&A with *A Colony in Crisis*,” *Haitian History* (blog),
    haitianhistory.tumblr.com/post/136472549793/qa-with-a-colony-in-crisis.

[^15]: See, for example, Antonio Sánchez Valverde, *Idea del valor de la
    isla española de Santo Domingo* (1862),
    archive.org/details/ideadelvalordel00valvgoog.

[^16]: “The Project,” para. 2 under ‘The Goals.” The [Haiti
    Lab](http://www.fhi.duke.edu/labs/haiti-lab/online-projects) at the
    John Hope Franklin Humanities Institute at Duke University gathers
    an important group of these projects; see
    www.fhi.duke.edu/labs/haiti-lab/online-projects.

[^17]: See, for example, “The Question of Recovery: Slavery, Freedom,
    and the Archive,” special issue, *Social Text*, no. 125 (December
    2015).
