---
layout: post
font: "dejavuserif"
title: 
  "long": "Digitizing the 'Sound Explosions' of Anglophone Caribbean Performance
Poetry"
  "short": Digitizing Sound Explosions
  "crossref": Explosions
author: 
- name: Janet Neigh
  shortname: Neigh
date: March 2016
issue: 1
doi: 
category: first-issue
abstract: "The Internet offers new performance platforms for Caribbean poets who
prioritize oral expression. One group realizing this potential is the
youth-led artist collective The 2 Cents Movement, based out of Trinidad
and Tobago, who circulate their video poems on social networking sites.
Through their DIY approach, they are building a broader youth audience
for their work. More generally, Caribbean poets are often
underrepresented in online poetry resources, particularly in
institution-based Internet audio archives. This article uses The 2 Cents
Movement as a preliminary model to understand how Internet audio
archives can be redesigned to amplify the total expression of Caribbean
poetry. Admittedly, The 2 Cents Movement offers a partial solution to a
much bigger problem; however, this article demonstrates the value of
examining poets’ engagements with digital technologies to develop better
archival standards and practices in sync with the politics of the work."
---

## Introduction

If Louise Bennett, the prolific Jamaican artist, were still alive and
performing today, how would the Internet fit into her creative practice?
Would she post poetry recordings on Facebook? Would children play with a
Miss Lou app? Would Aunty Roachy deliver wisdom via Twitter? Since she
embraced emerging technologies to teach her audience about the value of
the Jamaican language, social media likely would have played a prominent
role in her education activism. She turned to performance early in her
career to build an inclusive audience, and her media projects for the
Jamaica Broadcasting Corporation--her children’s television show *Ring
Ding* (1970–82) and her radio program *Miss Lou’s Views* (1966–82)--gave
her an expanded terrain to develop her call-and-response poetics.
Unfortunately, searching for Louise Bennett online today yields few
actual sound recordings of her poetry. Bennett’s underrepresentation
online--or, more aptly, her silence, since her words can be found but
rarely her voice--is characteristic of Caribbean poetry more generally.
This article stems from concern about who has the power to define poetry
in virtual spaces and whose voices receive airtime. As Kamau Brathwaite
establishes in his groundbreaking lecture *History of the Voice*,
Anglophone Caribbean poetry should be celebrated for its “sound
explosions,” yet it has remained relatively quiet online.[^1]

Internet audio archives for poetry have flourished in recent years.
Websites such as [PennSound](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/), [The
Poetry Archive](http://www.poetryarchive.org), [the Poetry
Foundation](http://www.poetryfoundation.org), [the Academy of American
Poets](https://www.poets.org), and [UbuWeb](http://www.ubuweb.com) have
provided excellent resources for contemporary poetics. These
twenty-first-century open-access collections offer both live and studio
recordings, roundtable discussions of poetry, lectures, and taped
interviews. While these digital platforms promise democratization, they
often repeat the exclusions of print archives. Many of these
collections, which now determine the content of poetry syllabi in
university classrooms, reinforce the United States as the dominant
center of Anglophone poetry in the Americas.[^2] For example, the Poetry
Foundation has 3,649 author pages, almost half of which are devoted to
US poets. The site features only eleven poets from the Caribbean region,
excluding many major voices from the region, including Louise Bennett.
Of the eleven Caribbean poet pages, none include audio poems and only
seven of them include actual poetry texts; the other four just feature
short author bios. Not only are Caribbean poets underrepresented in
these curated collections but their online presence is often sparse,
limited to random YouTube videos.[^3]

Despite their underrepresentation in web-based audio collections, many
contemporary Caribbean performance poets have embraced digital
technologies to build their audiences. These new digital poetries offer
a solution to what Laurence A. Breiner has characterized as the
“half-life” of Caribbean performance poems.[^4] According to him,
readers unable to attend a poem’s live recitation are always at a
disadvantage, because things like tone, gesture, and the poet’s
relationship with her audience also determine meaning. In terms of
distribution, digitized poetry recordings, unhindered by shipping fees
and trade tariffs, surpass print books in their international
portability, making them more accessible to Caribbean diasporic
communities.

![2 Cents Movement Poet](poet_performing2.jpg)

This article examines one of the best examples of innovative digital
poetry in the Caribbean: the youth-led artist collective [The 2 Cents
Movement](https://twitter.com/2CentsMovement), based out of Trinidad and
Tobago, who use social networking sites to circulate their video poems.
Students at the University of the Southern Caribbean started the
movement in 2010, and their activities have strengthened youth
enthusiasm for spoken-word poetry. Some of their activities include
island-wide school tours, open-mic nights, slam contests, television and
radio broadcasts, video production of poems, and student poetry
workshops. They present themselves as a movement to align their poetry
with social change. Their digital recordings become modes of production,
publication, distribution, preservation, and community activism. Their
populist approach builds on the vernacular pedagogical dynamics of
performance established by figures like Louise Bennett. By using these
technologies to integrate creative and political praxes, The 2 Cents
Movement realizes Brathwaite’s theory of nation language and his
argument that sound reproduction technologies can be used to
reinvigorate Afro-centric oral traditions.[^5]

Brathwaite identifies how nation language poets challenge the way that
paper records were used to discredit oral ways of knowing and uphold
institutional power during colonization. When a dub poet like Linton
Kwesi Johnson recites definitive works such as “[Reggae
Sounds](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8omA7huF6XE),” lines such as
“foot-drop find drum, blood story / bass history is a moving / is a
hurting black story” attack print-centric forms of knowledge.[^6] He
builds on a history of Caribbean people using performance to circumvent
the print archive to produce, record, and transmit knowledge through
embodied acts.[^7] Such knowledge depends on the interaction between the
performer and her audience. The format of Bennett’s *Ring Ding*, where
she would invite children from the studio audience to join her on stage
to recite poetry with her, exemplifies this well. Such communal
pedagogies also extend to adult audiences. For example, Oku Onuora
defines the goal of dub poetry as consciousness-raising: “It also mean
to dub out the isms and schisms and to dub consciousness into the
people-dem head.”[^8] Performance creates what Brathwaite characterizes
as “total expression,” engendering a space for collective, politicized
vernacular consciousness to take shape:

The other thing about nation language is that it is part of what may be
called *total expression*. . . . Reading is an isolated, individualistic
expression. The oral tradition on the other hand demands not only the
griot but the audience to complete the community: the noise and sounds
that the maker makes are responded to by the audience and are returned
to him. Hence we have the creation of a continuum where meaning truly
resides.[^9]

Although Brathwaite seems to be arguing here that the full experience of
the sonic continuum depends on live interaction, he actually emphasizes
the opposite. A central point of his text, originally titled “an
electronic lecture” for his 1979 Harvard presentation, harnesses the
potential of sound reproduction technologies to create new pathways for
total expression. For him, they intensify “the detonations within
Caribbean sound-poetry \[that\] have imploded us into new shapes and
consciousness of ourselves.”[^10] Brathwaite’s combustion metaphors of
“detonations” and “explosions” reveal his prioritizing of electronic
sound. As Jonathan Sterne establishes, “All sound-reproduction
technologies work through the use of transducers” that convert acoustic
waves into electronic impulses.[^11] Brathwaite suggests that these
energy conversions amplify total expression rather than weaken it, which
The 2 Cents Movement substantiates.

So much scholarship focuses on written documents and techniques from the
past, yet many digital humanists are early adopters. They embrace the
unfinished, they invite collaboration, they move us off the page, and
they aim to build things for the future. Inspired by this approach, this
article uses The 2 Cents Movement as a preliminary model to understand
how Internet audio archives can be redesigned to amplify the total
expression of Caribbean poetry. Admittedly, The 2 Cents Movement offers
an incomplete solution to a much larger problem; however, I argue that
we need to begin by examining poets’ engagements with digital
technologies to develop better archival standards and practices in sync
with the politics of the work. In this collaborative spirit, I also
invite readers to click on the links as they read this article, to
immerse themselves in what’s already online, and to think about how we
can build on this virtual world of Caribbean poetics.

Part of what makes Brathwaite’s *History of the Voice* an important
catalyst for building digital archives is that he avoids the tendency in
oral scholarship to fixate on the live event. For example, Hugh Hodges
stresses the difficulty of studying performance poetry, lamenting that
we typically examine only “the textualized trace of it.”[^12] He
considers sound and video recordings as texts, because he argues that
the total expression of the live event does not get captured on them.
Similarly, Peggy Phelan claims that what she calls “liveness” disappears
in recordings of a performance.[^13] As Sterne puts it, this attitude
upholds “face-to-face communication and bodily presence” as “the
yardsticks by which to measure all communicative activity” and
“define\[s\] sound reproduction negatively, as negating or modifying an
undamaged interpersonal or face-to-face copresence.”[^14] Brathwaite
takes a more innovative approach to sound reproduction technologies by
highlighting their capacity to challenge print-centric aesthetics. The 2
Cents Movement demonstrates how digital technologies provide even more
opportunities for this through their use of music videography and
microblogging. However, what Brathwaite envisioned over 30 years ago
through “resonating tape\[s\],” eight tracks, and LPs has yet to be
fully realized in the broader terrain of our research methodologies and
poetry resources.[^15]

Critical approaches to performance poetry have been slow to develop
because of the Western assumption that “the text of a poem--that is, the
written document--is primary and that the recitation or performance of a
poem by the poet is secondary and fundamentally inconsequential to the
‘poem itself.’”[^16] While the digital should free us from our obsession
with a text-based idiom in literary studies, it has yet to do so.[^17]
As this article demonstrates, even the designs of most online poetry
audio collections still privilege the methodology of textual close
reading rather than encourage us to develop new sound-based methods of
analysis.[^18] In a similar vein, recent efforts to build Caribbean
digital archives have focused on converting print documents and have not
engaged as much with sound media.[^19] Resources and funding certainly
drive this, since print materials are easier and cheaper to digitize.
Yet given the oral dimensions of Caribbean cultures, we must address how
to represent and archive performance to overcome the structural biases
of print archives.

## Creating Digital Griots: The 2 Cents Movement

![Audience Interaction](audience_interaction2.jpg)

Scrolling through [The 2 Cents Movement’s Facebook
page](https://www.facebook.com/The2CentsMovement/) reveals a vibrant
online poetry community. As of December 2015, they have more than 13,000
followers, and their page includes announcements about upcoming
performances, photographs of performances, political news updates, links
to live-stream their events, and video poems. Its campus origins explain
why Facebook, a social networking site designed for college students,
has played a central role in the development of the movement. The
founder, Jean Claude Cournand, an undergraduate at the time, sought to
build a stronger intellectual youth culture--to invite youth to put in
their two cents by expressing their views on current issues (ranging
from marijuana legislation to homophobia) through spoken-word poetry. In
an interview, he explained that they chose “to go into the digital
habitat rather than trying to reach people through events alone,” in
order to attract a youth audience.[^20] Their best-known projects are
the Intercol and Verses national slam competitions, held annually as
part of the Bocas Lit Festival (Verses was recently renamed the First
Citizens National Poetry Slam). The two different slams--Intercol
features high school teams, and Verses features prominent poets who
compete individually--reflect their mentorship structure. The 2015
winner of the Intercol slam, [Michael
Logie](http://www.bocaslitfest.com/2015/the-spoken-word-intercol-champion-is/),
got to pick a 2 Cents Movement poet as a mentor to work with him for a
year to help him develop his poetry.[^21] The 2 Cents Movement has also
collaborated with the Trinidad and Tobago Radio Network on the [Free
Speech
Project](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLsZJUoc_yr1ufNZGIsFg74Fl3yuZTNU9k),
where young artists recite their poems weekly on the radio. These poems
are also produced as videos and archived on the network’s YouTube
channel. The majority of the movement’s activities are coordinated and
advertised online, and major events like the slam contests can be
live-streamed. They exist solely through freely accessible sites and do
not have their own server or domain name, which suggests that a lack of
resources does not need to be an obstacle to building an online presence
for Caribbean poetry. In addition to reaching youth in Trinidad and
Tobago, they have gained an international following by circulating their
poetry on social media.

Their Twitter and Facebook updates for their [2014–2015 Courts Bocas
Speak Out Tour](http://www.bocaslitfest.com/courts-bocas-speak-out/) of
more than fifty secondary schools demonstrates their use of these
platforms to enhance audience interaction. During this tour, some of the
nation’s best performance poets mentored high school students as they
wrote and performed their own works through performances and workshops.
These school visits provided a way for The 2 Cents Movement to promote
the Intercol slam competition. Photo live-tweets of their tour
performances often focused on the students actively participating in the
audience rather than on the poet performing. In these shots, the camera
points at the audience, often catching only the performer’s back or the
corner of her shoulder.[^22] 

![Audience interaction](audience_interaction1.jpg)

![Poet performer](poet_performing1.jpg)

The online viewer gets to stare out at the
auditorium filled with students, which allows her to occupy the
performer’s gaze but also view a student’s face as a mirror, inviting
her to identify with both the performer and the audience. This
elaborates on the pedagogy offered during the tour, where the poets’
performances provide students with a model for their own poetry
aspirations. Visually, Twitter and Facebook followers become situated in
the continuum of total expression--in the reciprocal exchange between
performer and audience. 

![Audience interaction](audience_interaction3.jpg)

High school students who attended a 2 Cents Movement performance at their own school
could then follow them on Twitter and Facebook and connect these images
to their own participation in the live event. The photos (and the
movement as a whole) downplay individual author celebrity in favor of
building a student-focused collectivity. The 2 Cents Movement uses
Twitter and Facebook to create “a constancy of presence” to link
together different high school communities in Trinidad and Tobago.[^23]

Although these social media platforms governed by the commercial needs
of US-based multinationals certainly hold limitations, rhetoric scholar
Kevin Adonis Browne stresses the possibility for subversive adaptation.
Examining Caribbean Internet users’ chatting, blogging, and
video-sharing practices, he illustrates how users adapt everyday
vernacular practices to assert their presence in digital public spaces
that often render them invisible. While his argument relates to
individuals’ everyday encounters online rather than large-scale digital
projects, the parallels he establishes between “a carnivalesque
imperative” and the Internet lend insight into The 2 Cents Movement’s
adaptation of social media to expand on the power of total expression in
online environments.[^24] Rather than view Caribbean folk cultures in
opposition to digital forms, Browne views the inventiveness of both as
part of what makes them compatible. He demonstrates how communal
vernacular practices easily translate to an online environment because
they emerge out of “a history of adaptability” necessary for “those who
have had to find a way or make one when none seemed available.”[^25] For
example, in the colonial era, musicians’ invented steel pan drumming to
get around the ban on using actual drums and managed to make noise in a
colonial environment that aimed to silence them. Corporate social media
platforms also curtail creative expression through their circumscribed
structures. Such restrictions often reinforce the majority voice, yet
Facebook and Twitter have also proven themselves useful for the growth
of subcultures and movements.

Media scholars have identified how Facebook’s interface encourages users
to adopt neoliberal values. The anthropologist Alex Fattal draws a
connection between a user’s desire to gain as many likes and friends as
possible and Facebook’s corporate desire to become the most dominant
social network in the world, characterizing this as “the unspoken logic
of accumulation and curiosity that undergirds” the platform.[^26] To
what extent can this “logic of accumulation and curiosity,” which sounds
eerily similar to older imperial impulses, be disrupted? By using social
media to augment their performance events, The 2 Cents Movement
intercepts this logic of accumulation by bringing users into the dynamic
of total expression. While scholars often critique Facebook for
weakening face-to-face sociality, The 2 Cents Movement reveals how it
can be used to deepen social connections.[^27]

Through social media, they also make their performances part of everyday
life. People browse Facebook as they ride the bus to work, or as they
wait in line at the grocery store. The 2 Cents Movement often depicts
the performance dynamics of such quotidian spaces in their
studio-produced video poems available on YouTube. For example, their
most popular video poem [“Maxi Man Tracking School
Gyal”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OA8eLoPylU) (originally titled
“Yankee’s Gone”), by Crystal Skeete, takes place on a Curepe street and
on a bus. Skeete addresses her concern about adult males sexually
preying on underage schoolgirls by writing a poem in the voice of a
teenage girl who refuses their advances. Similar to earlier women poets
like Miss Lou and Jean “Binta” Breeze, she uses the dramatic monologue
to give voice to women who are denied respect in the public sphere.
Through social media her video becomes even more impactful because a
viewer might be in that particular social space as she watches the poem
and even be witnessing what Skeete describes. This restores an important
aspect of Caribbean oral traditions, where yard performances blend into
everyday practices rather than become isolated special events. Miss Lou
had a similar aim in her market women poems, yet her ability to connect
her audience to her settings was often restrained by the artifice of the
theater stage. By creating a tangible bond between their real-life users
and the mediated voices in their poems, The 2 Cents Movement invites
users to do more than merely like their status updates and continue
scrolling.

{% iframe https://www.youtube.com/embed/9OA8eLoPylU %}


In addition to microblogging their performances, The 2 Cents Movement’s
video poems, like Skeete’s “Maxi Man,” demonstrate how audiovisual
recording technologies can be used to enhance the communal dynamic of
total expression. Their videos challenge the idea that poetry depends on
print publication, since many of their well-known poems are available
only in this format. By getting us off the page, their videography
expands the possibilities for how we might edit and archive performance
poetry. Released in 2013, Skeete’s video went viral on social media and
received more than 88,000 views on YouTube.[^28] Her poem exemplifies
the 2 Cents Movement’s approach, in that she initially attended one of
their workshops as a medical student and she is now a leading poet in
the movement. She won the 2013 Verses poetry slam with her performance
of this poem; however, the popular version on The 2 Cents Movement’s
YouTube channel is a studio recording made by BeatOven Productions with
videography by Denithy. Rather than aim to recreate the experience of
the live performance event, the video invites a viewer to feel included
in the street scene being depicted. Through their synthesis of the
dramatic monologue form and the music video genre, Skeete and the 2
Cents Movement team cultivate a sense of audience connection and
encourage dialogue beyond the space of the poem.

![Maxi man cast](maxi_man_cast.jpg)

Skeete dresses in a government school uniform to play her character in
the video. Her embodiment of the character creates a dialogic
relationship between her persona and her words because her recitation
critiques the behavior that she acts out. The dramatic monologue’s
implied addressee is another high school girl who is swayed by a maxi
man’s advances. The speaker warns her that “these free rides are going
to end in horror / trust me / with that nine-month sentence things does
go sour.”[^29] Skeete’s conversational style, enhanced by the video
editing and camera angles, encourage the viewer to feel as though Skeete
is speaking directly to her. Standing in the middle of the street,
Skeete begins with the lines, “Posing on every street corner / this is
the resurrection of ‘Jean and Dinah’… No Yankees here / only maxi man
conductor.” Referencing Mighty Sparrow’s calypso hit “Jean and Dinah,”
about how the presence of a World War II US army base led to
prostitution in Trinidad, she draws attention to how girls getting free
bus rides from maxi men for sexual favors recreates a similar dynamic.
Through an intergenerational call and response, she situates her poem in
the Trinidadian oral tradition. Skeete’s poem exemplifies how The 2
Cents Movement aims to cultivate a socially conscious form of learning
that values vernacular language and knowledge.

Similar to music videos, Skeete’s recitation alternates between a
voiceover and her character speaking onscreen. By playing with the
boundaries between diegetic and non-diegetic sound, the editing
capitalizes on sound’s permeability, encouraging her virtual audience to
feel a closer connection to her words. Skeete’s voice extends beyond the
boundaries of the video and infiltrates the listening space, collapsing
the distance between the onscreen performance and the audience’s
experience of it, especially if they happen to be in a similar setting.

In the narrative that unfolds, the camera angles accentuate Skeete’s
embodied performance. While conventional music videos often sexually
objectify women’s bodies, the jump cuts between medium shots, medium
long shots, and close-ups (often from a slight low angle) emphasize
Skeete’s power as she dramatizes her character’s self-actualization and
encourages other girls to do the same. Skeete’s words combined with the
camera work challenge the male gaze to create a virtual space of female
community. This reaches its peak when the speaker sits in the back of
the van reciting her critique and a reverse shot depicts the maxi man
gazing at her in the rearview mirror. His gaze is literally reflected
back at him, while the speaker verbally refuses his objectification. In
the middle of the van, a girl flirts with another maxi man. Throughout
the poem, the speaker seems to completely condemn this behavior;
however, the poem ends with a surprise twist. As she gets out of the
maxi man’s van, she tells the audience, “This brown-skinned gyal / going
home and mind she child,” indicating that her advice is based on her own
mistakes with a maxi man (Skeete). This surprise ending builds the
speaker’s authority (not by separating her from her community but by
underscoring her participation in it) and encourages schoolgirls
watching the poem to trust her advice.

In the live performance of “Maxi Man Tracking School Gyal,” Skeete’s
critique of sexual harassment is likely powerful; however, the video
format allows a viewer to experience with greater clarity the embodied
experience of resisting sexual harassment on the street. For female
viewers who went through something similar, the recreation of the scene
and its provocative ending deepens their identification with the
speaker. Like a griot, Skeete speaks for a community of young girls, or
rather speaks with them, as her performance encourages them to bring
their experiences into their interpretation of the poem.

Unlike many poetry recordings available online, which are taped at live
events, The 2 Cents Movement engages technologies as part of the
artistic composition of the poem through their studio-produced poems. By
borrowing from music videography, they invite us to see performance
archives as something more expansive than as a place to simply store
copies of “original” live events. This moves us move beyond what Sterne
characterizes as the preoccupation with fidelity, which advertisers
established early on in sound reproduction history. Sterne reveals how
“sound fidelity is a story that we tell ourselves to staple separate
sonic realities together.” It maintains the illusion of “reproduced
sound as a mediation of ‘live’ sounds;” however, “the ‘medium’ does not
necessarily mediate, authenticate, dilute, or extend a preexisting
social relation.”[^30] Rather than only view an archive as a space to
preserve former instances of total expression, we should also view them
as an opportunity to engender new forms of it. Rather than use recording
technologies to recover or preserve a lost history of the voice, they
can be used to actively construct a history of the voice--to create a
sonic reality where new social relations can take shape.

## Redesigning Internet Audio Archives for Caribbean Poetry

The 2 Cents Movement’s DIY approach to digitizing poetry illustrates
that a lot can be accomplished by adapting existing platforms and with
limited resources; however, the underrepresentation of Caribbean poetry
online will not be solved solely through social media and the “free
culture” of the Internet. Merely uploading more poems to YouTube will
not be enough to overcome the structural biases that silence (and drown
out) Caribbean performance poetry online. As Rick Prelinger establishes,
YouTube has become “in the eyes of the public, the default online
moving-image archive.” [^31] Yet it lacks many of the defining
characteristics of archives that make them valuable, such as a focus on
long-term preservation and “strictly codified lines of conduct” that
have been carefully developed through academic practice and intellectual
debate.[^32] The underrepresentation of Caribbean poetry in Internet
audio archives is also symptomatic of the global digital divide, which
is especially acute for Africa-descended populations.[^33] However,
Curwen Best points out that “the flip side to the notion of the digital
divide is therefore the formation of strategic space. It is this
strategic space that opens up an area and arena of knowledge about
evolving technologies.”[^34] To take advantage of “this strategic
space,” this section of the article evaluates the standards and
practices that have been established by existing Internet audio archives
and considers how a Caribbean poetry collection could be organized to
realize total expression.

A discussion about archiving poetry recordings would be incomplete
without a consideration of the achievements of
[PennSound](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/). As the leading US
collection, it has quickly become the standard for how to create a
web-based poetry audio archive. University of Pennsylvania professors
Charles Bernstein and Al Filreis started the collection in 2003
primarily for classroom use. It holds over 45,000 poetry recordings
available for free streaming and download. Their files are downloaded
roughly four million times a month.[^35] For poetry, this number is
astounding when one considers the limited print runs and book sales for
contemporary poetry. Although US poets and avant-garde aesthetics tend
to predominate, the site includes author pages for some prominent
Caribbean poets, including
[Brathwaite](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Brathwaite.php), and
[M. NourbeSe Philip](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Philip.php).
They also hold some of the few
[Bennett](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Bennett.php) recordings
available online. The site uses the following archival taxonomies:
authors, series, anthologies, collections, groups, and classics, which
provide the user with a variety of ways to study a poet’s work. The
[PennSound Manifesto](http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/manifesto.php)
is worth examining because it has set the precedent for subsequent
Internet poetry collections. They provide the following criteria for
poetry audio: “It must be free and downloadable;” “It must be MP3 or
better;” “It must be singles;” “It must be named;” “It must embed
bibliographic information in the file;” and “It must be indexed.”[^36]
These criteria have proved successful in terms of encouraging widespread
use, particularly on college campuses. They archive each poem
individually (rather than entire events), because this makes them easier
to find, access, and download, and it allows listeners to create their
own playlists. In their own words, they adapt “a consumer-oriented MP3
file exchange approach” for a non-profit library.[^37] By embedding
bibliographic information in the file and naming each one, they uphold
archival standards and ensure that future researchers will have access
to information about the context for the recording, something a social
media platform like YouTube does not always provide. Their
straightforward interface, which lets users select from an alphabetized
list of authors, also erases implicit hierarchies that come from the
emphasis on accumulation in social media sites where voices are forced
to compete with each other for likes and views.

While Penn Sound’s open access model holds a lot of potential for
Caribbean performance poetry, their prioritizing of free resources may
not be as easy to achieve for Caribbean poetry. An extreme example of
this free culture ethos is represented by Kenneth Goldsmith, the founder
of [UBUweb](http://www.ubuweb.com), who for awhile maintained a page on
the site called the “Wall of Shame,” where he would publically condemn
any artist who asked for her work to be removed from the site by writing
her name on the wall.[^38] Unlike Goldsmith, PennSound strives to ensure
that all of their recordings are “cleared for copyright to be
distributed free for noncommercial and educational purposes.”[^39] While
this democratic and anti-capitalistic approach may seem appealing for
Caribbean poetry, in practice it may be more difficult to implement,
particularly for poets who view performance as a central part of their
artistic production. In the manifesto, Bernstein states that the debates
about file sharing in the music industry do not apply to poetry: “One of
the advantages of working with poetry sound files is that we don't
anticipate a problem with rights. At present and in the conceivable
future, there is no profit to be gained by the sale of recorded
poetry.”[^40] Yet Caribbean poets such as Mutabaruka and Linton Kwesi
Johnson built their careers through their affiliation with the reggae
recording industry and make money off of their albums. The 2 Cents
Movement offers their recordings for free; however, as a group of
younger poets, they may be more willing to share their work online to
build their reputation.

The subject of copyright and fair use for Caribbean performance poetry
is a complex issue, which deserves its own treatment in a separate
article. In terms of the current discussion, it offers another example
of the persistence of print-centrism in poetry scholarship. The emphasis
on free recordings implicitly upholds the idea that the artistic labor
of poetry is more worthy of payment when it is print-based. Moreover, it
demonstrates how we define poems as texts rather than as performances.
The Poetry Foundation’s [*Code for Best Practices in Fair Use For
Poetry*](http://www.poetryfoundation.org/downloads/FairUsePoetryBooklet_singlepg_2.pdf)
underscores this point. A group of poets, editors, and publishers met at
the Poetry Foundation’s Harriet Monroe Poetry Institute and collaborated
with American University's Center for Social Media and its Washington
College of Law in 2011 to create the guide. Although they outline their
purpose as “identifying obstacles preventing poetry from coming fully
into new media and, where possible, imagining how to remove or mitigate
these obstacles,” almost none of their examples involve poetry
audio.[^41] Yet for Caribbean poets a major stumbling block to “coming
fully into new media” is a clear set of fair use practices for
performance-based work. In the “Poetry Online” section, their examples
pertain to the appearance of text on websites. The document concludes
with a section on “Literary Performance;” however, it only addresses
poets who incorporate poems by other artists into their readings. This
document becomes completely irrelevant for groups like The 2 Cents
Movement who rarely produce text versions of their poems.

This print-centrism also extends to the design of audio collections. I
agree with Kate Eichhorn, who argues that most poetry sound archives
(both digital and analog) have yet to realize the potential of archiving
sound due to “the widely held assumption \[in literary studies\] that
the archive is necessarily a space of writing and, hence, opposed to
speech and other performative acts.”[^42] Eichhorn proposes that we need
“to create a sound archive designed to recover and preserve the
embodied, interactive, and present nature of the performed word.”[^43]
In her assessment, archived poetry recordings too often become “flat and
lifeless artifacts.”[^44] Although Eichhorn focuses on avant-garde
poets, her arguments apply to Caribbean poets who foreground sound as an
integral part of the poem’s meaning. Such work accessible in an archive
designed to disrupt our text-based conceptions of archival knowledge
would undoubtedly lead us more assertively into other forms of knowing
rather than allow the digital to reconsolidate print paradigms.

One notable exception to the underrepresentation of Anglophone Caribbean
poets in Internet audio collections is [The Poetry
Archive](http://www.poetryarchive.org/), supported by the Arts Council
of England. This site features more Caribbean poets than most, because
[the Caribbean Poetry
Project](http://caribbeanpoetry.educ.cam.ac.uk/)--a group of scholars
and poets from the Cambridge University Faculty of Education, the Centre
for Commonwealth Education, and the University of the West
Indies--collaborated with The Poetry Archive to improve access. Out of
476 poets, twenty-three are from the Caribbean region. While this is not
a huge percentage, it is considerably more than most sites, and every
Caribbean poet page has sound recordings that can be streamed for free
or downloaded for a fee of £0.89. The Poetry Archive, like many Internet
audio archives, specializes in classroom resources. They have a special
page for [teaching Caribbean
poetry](http://www.poetryarchive.org/collection/caribbean-poetry-0) with
a selection of sound recordings and [“A Guide to the Language of
Caribbean
Poetry.”](http://www.poetryarchive.org/articles/guide-language-caribbean-poetry)
The Caribbean Poetry Project’s work with The Poetry Archive demonstrates
how cross-disciplinary and cross-institutional collaborations help to
break down Anglo-centrism.

Yet analyzing the design of the Poetry Archive author pages reveals that
we need to do more than add voices to existing archives. As Amy Earhart
cautions, for digital recovery projects for writers of color to be
successful, we also must “theorize the technological with the same rigor
as we theorize the content.”[^45] If one compares the recording of
Linton Kwesi Johnson reciting [“Di Great
Insohreckshan”](http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/di-great-insohreckshan)
on The Poetry Archive with a [YouTube
recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IUNQS7Pwwu4) of him
performing it at an outdoor festival in Venezuela in 2008, the total
expression feels much more resonant in the YouTube version than on the
Poetry Archive site.[^46] I make this comparison to illustrate how the
design of the Poetry Archive page mutes the insurrectionary tone of
Johnson’s poem about the Brixton Riots, not to demonstrate that the
YouTube platform is inherently better at representing total expression.
Obviously, the YouTube video allows one to see Johnson’s body and facial
expressions, which one cannot get from the Poetry Archive audio
recording, but it is not as simple as video versus audio. Although the
sound quality lacks the clarity of the Poetry Archive recording, the
uneven audio levels provide a more authentic experience of what hearing
this poem in a large crowd at an outdoor festival would have felt like.
The spontaneity of live performances, including sound glitches and
background noises, becomes part of what Brathwaite characterizes as the
“sonority contrasts” of total expression.[^47] As Eichhorn points out,
“these intruders are precisely what sound technicians often seek to
filter out as they prepare recordings for the archive.”[^48] The Poetry
Archive version of “Di Great Insohreckshan” follows the predominant
sound-editing style for Internet audio archives. Martin Spinelli
describes this style as “the seamless edit,” designed to highlight the
poet’s voice and minimize all other distractions, including the
recording scene (whether live or in-studio) and the “material elements
of their production.”[^49]

In addition to using conventional sound-editing, [Johnson’s author
page](http://www.poetryarchive.org/poet/linton-kwesi-johnson) follows
the standard visual design that can be found on The Poetry Archive as
well as other online poetry collections such as PennSound. His page
features an author portrait (rather than a performance action shot), a
biography, and links to individual poem tracks. Beneath the poem title
and author name, one can click the play button and listen to the
recording. The Poetry Archive uses a simple audio player that allows a
listener to start, pause, and stop the track. Johnson’s author biography
explains that his poems on the site were recorded from live performances
and come from his CD *LKJ A Cappella Live*. Despite the claim that “the
energy of his live recitals gives the recordings a unique electricity,
interspersed with the laughter and applause of audiences around Europe,”
the seamless editing of “Di Great Insohreckshan” allows one to listen to
Johnson’s entire recitation before realizing that it is a live
performance.[^50] Once the poem ends, the only audible audience noises
are a cough and polite applause that slowly fades out. Rather than
convey “a unique electricity,” the cough suggests a subdued audience who
tried to remain silent until the end of the performance. The page
provides no information about the specifics of the event or who the
European audience was, although it sounds like it might be a poetry
reading in an academic setting. The track certainly holds no trace of a
communal “dub consciousness.”[^51] By not clearly identifying the track
as a single performance, the archive presents it as the authoritative
audio version. In the left-hand margin, under the heading “About the
Poem,” it lists the themes as “social, unrest, race, and Caribbean” but
provides no information about the Brixton Riots.

Derek Furr notes that while online poetry collections devote attention
to different aesthetics, what unites them is the idea that hearing a
poet voice her own work is crucial to understanding the poem. Yet
despite the interest in vocalization, collections tend to downplay the
setting of the poet’s performance by providing little information about
when and where the reading occurred and why this particular event was
recorded.[^52] While certain sites, such as PennSound, make sure that
all of the bibliographic info is embedded in the single file with
accurate metadata, often all that this provides is the date and physical
location of the reading. By divorcing the poem from its contextual
setting, this approach erases the reciprocal relationship between the
poet and her audience. Furr proposes that poetry recordings (both live
and in-studio) become valuable because “when we close listen, we hear
not only the sounds of the poem and the poet’s voicing of them, but also
the echoes of previous scenes of reading and listening.”[^53] Through
webpage design and sound editing, The Poetry Archive downplays the
previous audiences of “Di Great Insohreckshan” so that the online user
feels as though she is the only person in the audience. While The 2
Cents Movement illustrates how cinematic approaches can be used to
deepen total expression, the Johnson example illustrates the value of
preserving the ephemeral qualities of a live performance in a recording
to enrich the listening experience. Furr borrows Charles Bernstein’s
term *close listening* to characterize how a user should engage with
audio recordings. Based on his experience with PennSound Bernstein
proposes close listening as an alternative to close reading, where one
prioritizes the materiality of sound and the aural experience.[^54] Yet,
in practice, how much does close listening actually deviate from close
reading on Internet audio archives?

Annie Murray and Jared Wiercinski, curators of
[SpokenWeb](http://spokenweb.ca/), a collection of recordings of a
Montreal poetry reading series from 1966 to 1977, point out that while
most Internet audio archives make listening the focus, their structure
makes them multimodal. Accordingly, they stress that the visual elements
of online poetry archives need careful consideration. They explore “what
kinds of site navigation, audio visualization, design elements and
functionalities could be offered by a Web-based spoken word interface,
and how these might enhance the listening process and, ultimately, the
scholarly endeavor.” [^55] Because very little scholarship exists on how
people engage with sounded poems, they acknowledge that their
suggestions for “a sound archive ‘recipe’ that other cultural heritage
institutions can follow” are based on established reading
practices.[^56] They make some helpful suggestions, including using a
waveform display for sound visualization, and providing listeners with a
media player that allows them more control over the playback. They also
suggest incorporating any available images and videos of the performance
event, much like The 2 Cents Movement’s photo documentation on Twitter
and Facebook. However, other suggestions such as tethering audio
playback with a written transcript keep the primary focus on reading
rather than listening.[^57] For example, on the Poetry Archive site,
beneath the link to play “Di Great Insohreckshan,” one can also click on
a “Read this Poem” link. This encourages scholars to engage in what is,
for many, the more familiar interpretive practice rather than to develop
new modes of analysis based on sound. In digital archives, Bernstein
suggests that “poems, set adrift from their visual grounding in
alphabetic texts, might begin to resemble the songs from which, for so
long, they have been divided.”[^58] However, to achieve this we need to
1) be wary of a one-size-fits-all approach, and 2) carefully design
visual elements to encourage sonic engagement rather than to reify a
visual economy of text. Such a divide between song and poem has never
existed for Anglophone Caribbean performance poets, yet colonial
legacies continue to dictate that we read rather than listen to this
work.

Even when one is only listening, Internet audio archives often recreate
the feeling of reading alone. Clicking on the link and listening to the
poem while one looks at the author portrait (similar to the style found
on book jackets) mimics the experience of solitary reading, where one
feels in private conversation with the author. Simple audio players that
have only a linear time-lapse bar (rather than a more complex waveform
display) encourage the eyes to move from right to left, as they do in
the act of reading. When a poem is presented as a decontextualized
single track, a listener is encouraged to adopt a new critical approach
and treat the poem as a self-contained object. Listening, like reading,
becomes “an isolated, individualistic expression” rather than a communal
endeavor.[^59] Sound reproduction technologies have also encouraged our
hearing to become more individualistic. Using headphones as his example,
Sterne argues that such devices encourage listening to be “more
orientated toward constructs of private space and private property,”
which encourages “sound to become a commodity.”[^60]

In contrast, The 2 Cents Movement recreates the communal experience of
listening to a poem, which is a key part of total expression. Their
photo tweets and poetry videos make online members a part of their
participatory audience. We have much work to do to figure out how to
build Internet audio archives that recreate this communal experience of
listening. Everything--including sound editing, interface, database
design, navigation system and copyright issues--needs careful
consideration to realize the digital potential of total expression. To
embark on this work, it is crucial that we turn to the poets themselves
and build on their education legacies.

So much of the history of the voice has already been lost, or muted, by
the ongoing colonial bias toward nation language, as well as limited
resources and funding. Caribbean poetry recordings that survive buried
in dusty boxes in attics and library storage rooms sit silently waiting
for new audiences to return to them “the noise and sounds that the maker
makes.”[^61] Since these reel-to-reel tapes, cassettes, eight-tracks,
CDs, and LPs are fragile media, threatened by technological obsolescence
and (sometimes) the tropical Caribbean climate, we must make digitizing
this vital record of Caribbean poetry history a priority.

[^1]: Edward Kamau Brathwaite, *History of the Voice: The Development of
    Nation Language in Anglophone Caribbean Poetry* (London: New Beacon
    Books, 1984), 13.

[^2]: See “PennSound Transforms How Poetry Is Taught the World Over,”
    *Penn News*, 26 June 2014,
    http://www.upenn.edu/pennnews/news/pennsound-transforms-how-poetry-taught-world-over.

[^3]: For a discussion of race in digital canons, see Amy E. Earhart,
    “Can Information be Unfettered? Race and the New Digital Humanities
    Canon,” in Mathew K. Gold, ed., *Debates in the Digital Humanities*
    (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), Open Access
    Edition, <http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu>. Earhart urges that “we need
    to examine the canon that we, as digital humanists, are
    constructing, a canon that skews toward traditional texts and
    excludes crucial work by women, people of color, and the GLBTQ
    community.”

[^4]: Laurence A. Breiner, “The Half-Life of Performance Poetry,”
    *Journal of West Indian Literature* 8, no. 1 (1998): 20.

[^5]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 13.

[^6]: Linton Kwesi Johnson, *Mi Revalueshanary Fren* (Keene, NY: Ausable
    Press, 2006), 15.

[^7]: Here I draw on Diana Taylor’s analysis of what she calls the
    repertoire to characterize how performance acts create cultural
    memory in the Americas. See Diana Taylor, *The Archive and the
    Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the Americas* (Durham, NC:
    Duke University Press, 2003).

[^8]: Quoted in Mervyn Morris, *‘Is English We Speaking’: and Other
    Essays* (Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers, 1999), 38.

[^9]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 18–19 (italics in original).

[^10]: Ibid., 49.

[^11]: Jonathan Sterne, *The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound
    Reproduction* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003), 22.

[^12]: Hugh Hodges, “Poetry and Overturned Cars: Why Performance Poetry
    Can’t Be Studied, (and Why We Should Study It Anyway),” in Susan
    Gingell and Wendy Roy, eds., *Listening Up, Writing Down, and
    Looking Beyond: Interfaces of the Oral, Written, and Visual*
    (Waterloo, ON: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2012), 98.

[^13]: As Phelan describes, “Performance’s only life is in the present.
    Performance cannot be saved, recorded, documented, or otherwise
    participate in the circulation of representations of
    representations: once it does so, it becomes something other than
    performance.” Peggy Phelan, *Unmarked: The Politics of Performance*
    (New York: Routledge, 1993), 146.

[^14]: Sterne, *The Audible Past*, 20.

[^15]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 49.

[^16]: Charles Bernstein, ed., *Close Listening: Poetry and the
    Performed Word* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 8.

[^17]: For a discussion about the neglect of sound analysis in digital
    literary studies, see Tanya Clement, David Tcheng, Loretta Auvil,
    Boris Capitanu, and Megan Monroe, “Sounding for Meaning: Using
    Theories of Knowledge Representation to Analyze Aural Patterns in
    Texts,” *Digital Humanities Quarterly* 7, no. 1 (2013),
    http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000146/000146.html.

[^18]: Although I do not have the space in this article to explore their
    work, studying the standards and practices developed by music
    historians for online collections such as the [Naxos Music
    Library](https://www.naxosmusiclibrary.com/home.asp?rurl=%2Fdefault%2Easp)
    would be another fruitful line of inquiry to help literary scholars
    move beyond text-based approaches.

[^19]: While there are Caribbean sound archives, such as
    [RadioHaiti](http://radiohaitilives.com), in Caribbean literary
    studies print archiving is much more prevalent. For example, major
    collections, such as the [Digital Library of the
    Caribbean](http://www.dloc.com), while excellent, primarily hold
    literary materials converted from print documents.

[^20]: Quoted in Bobie-lee Dixon, “Not afraid to put in their ‘2
    cents,’” *Trinidad and Tobago Guardian*, 16 July 2013,
    http://www.guardian.co.tt/entertainment/2013-07-15/not-afraid-put-their-‘2-cents’.

[^21]: “Logie Tops Schools Spoken Word ‘Intercol,’” *Trinidad and Tobago
    Guardian*, 2 April 2015,
    http://www.guardian.co.tt/lifestyle/2015-04-01/logie-tops-schools-spoken-word-‘intercol’.

[^22]: See their Twitter page: https://twitter.com/2CentsMovement. See
    also their individual albums on their Facebook page, where some of
    their school tour photos are collected. For example, see the album
    “Five Rivers Sec – Speak Out Tour 2014 – Day 27”:
    https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.610565055739844.1073741948.125245237605164&type=3.

[^23]: Dhiraj Murthy, *Twitter: Social Communication in the Twitter Age*
    (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2013), 39.

[^24]: Kevin Adonis Browne, *Tropic Tendencies: Rhetoric, Popular
    Culture, and the Anglophone Caribbean* (Pittsburgh: University of
    Pittsburgh Press, 2013), 129.

[^25]: Ibid., 134.

[^26]: Alex Fattal, “Facebook: Corporate Hackers, a Billion Users, and
    the Geo-Politics of the ‘Social Graph,’” *Anthropological Quarterly*
    85, no. 3 (2012): 931. See also Ilana Gershon, “Un-Friend My Heart:
    Facebook, Promiscuity, and Heartbreak in a Neoliberal Age,”
    *Anthropological Quarterly* 84, no. 4 (2011): 865-94.

[^27]: For a critique of Facebook as a community building form, see José
    Marichal, *Facebook Democracy: The Architecture of Disclosure and
    the Threat to Public Life* (Abingdon, Oxon, UK: Ashgate, 2012).

[^28]: Crystal Skeete, “Maxi Man Tracking School Gyal,” YouTube video,
    5.27, posted by The 2 Cents Movement, 25 June 2013,
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OA8eLoPylU.

[^29]: Skeete, “Maxi Man” (hereafter cited in text). Since I transcribed
    the quotations from a recording, any inaccuracies are mine.

[^30]: Sterne, *The Audible Past*, 219, 218, 226.

[^31]: Rick Prelinger, “The Appearance of Archives,” in Pelle Snickars
    and Patrick Vonderau, eds., *The YouTube Reader* (Stockholm:
    National Library of Sweden, 2009), 269.

[^32]: Frank Kessler and Mirko Tobias Schäfer, “Navigating YouTube:
    Constituting a Hybrid Information Management System,” in Snickars
    and Vonderau, *The YouTube Reader*, 277.

[^33]: Mary F. E. Ebeling, “The New Dawn: Black Agency in Cyberspace,”
    *Radical History Review* 87 (Fall 2003): 98. For a discussion of the
    global digital divide, see Pippa Norris, *Digital Divide: Civic
    Engagement, Information Poverty, and the Internet Worldwide* (New
    York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).

[^34]: Curwen Best, *The Politics of Caribbean Cyberculture* (New York:
    Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), 4.

[^35]: Tanya Barrientos, “Penn’s Rich Poetry Legacy,” *Penn Current*, 20
    May 2010,
    http://www.upenn.edu/pennnews/current/2010-05-20/features/penn’s-rich-poetry-legacy.

[^36]: Charles Bernstein, “PennSound Manifesto,” PennSound, 2003,
    http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/manifesto.php.

[^37]: Ibid.

[^38]: Astra Taylor, *The People’s Platform: Taking Back Power and
    Culture in the Digital Age* (New York: Picador, 2014), 153.

[^39]: Bernstein, “PennSound Manifesto.”

[^40]: Ibid.

[^41]: *Code for Best Practices in Fair Use For Poetry* (Center for
    Social Media and the Poetry Foundation, 2011),
    <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/foundation/bestpractices>.

[^42]: Kate Eichhorn, “Past Performance, Present Dilemma: A Poetics of
    Archiving Sound,” *Mosaic* 42 (2009): 187.

[^43]: Ibid., 190.

[^44]: Ibid., 184.

[^45]: Earhart, “Can Information be Unfettered?”

[^46]: Linton Kwesi Johnson, “Di Great Insohreckshan,” YouTube video,
    2.00, posted by Oscar David De Barros, 25 January 2013,
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IUNQS7Pwwu4.

[^47]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 46.

[^48]: Eichhorn, “Past Performance, Present Dilemma,” 190.

[^49]: Martin Spinelli, “Analog Echoes: A Poetics of Digital Audio
    Editing,” *Object 10: Cyberpoetics* (2002): 36, *UbuWeb Papers*, 16
    May 2007, http://www.ubu.com/papers/object/06\_spinelli.pdf.
    Spinelli criticizes poetry sound editing for being too influenced by
    traditional radio theory, questioning why most archived poetry
    recordings present sound as though it were a linear medium by using
    “the seamless, invisible, inaudible edit which dislodges nothing,
    which interrupts nothing, which is in fact deployed to remove
    interruption, to remove digression and to clarify” (36).

[^50]: Linton Kwesi Johnson Author Page, The Poetry Archive, accessed 23
    July 2015, http://www.poetryarchive.org/poet/linton-kwesi-johnson.

[^51]: Onuora quoted in Morris, *‘Is English We Speaking,’* 38.

[^52]: Derek Furr, *Recorded Poetry and Poetic Reception from Edna
    Millay to the Circle of Robert Lowell* (New York: Palgrave
    Macmillan, 2010), 5.

[^53]: Ibid., 149.

[^54]: See Bernstein, *Close Listening*, 3–26.

[^55]: Annie Murray and Jared Wiercinski, “Looking at Archival Sound:
    Enhancing the Listening Experience in a Spoken Word Archive,” *First
    Monday* 17, no. 4 (2012),
    http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3808/3197.

[^56]: Annie Murray and Jared Wiercinski, “A Design Methodology for
    Web-based Sound Archives,” *DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly* 8,
    no. 2 (2014),
    http://digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/8/2/000173/000173.html\#p6.

[^57]: For a summary of their specific suggestions for visual design,
    see Murray and Wiercinski, “Looking at Archival Sound.”

[^58]: Charles Bernstein, “Making Audio Visible: The Lessons of Visual
    Language for the Textualization of Sound,” *Textual Practice* 23,
    no. 6 (2009): 966, doi:10.1080/09502360903361550.

[^59]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 18.

[^60]: Sterne, *The Audible Past*, 24.

[^61]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 18–19.
