---
layout: review
section: reviews
title: 
  "long": "A Review of \"Two Plantations\""
  "short": Review
author: 
- name: Jessica Marie Johnson
  shortname: Johnson
date: May 2016
issue: 1
---

Based on research compiled by Richard Dunn over more than forty years,
the website [*Two Plantations*](http://www.twoplantations.com) expands
on his work published in print and e-book form as *A Tale of Two
Plantations: Slave Life and Labor in Jamaica and Virginia*.[^1] Dunn’s
research on seven multigenerational families was culled from plantation
ledgers and other source material held by the Barham Papers in the
Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford and the Tayloe Papers at
the Virginia Historical Society in Richmond. Creation of the site
itself, however, was spearheaded by Vincent Brown and is a project of
the History Design Studio.

*Two Plantations* leads users horizontally and vertically to
representations of the lives of 431 enslaved people at two plantations.
The landing page features a short description of the site with a
present-day image of a building surrounded by lush greenery, a stately
structure presumably on the site of either Mesopotamia (Jamaica) or
Mount Airy (Virginia) and rendered in shades of blue and emblazoned.
Slight, nearly undetectable animation causes the sentence beneath the
description to glow. In italics, it reads, “This is their story.”
Clicking an arrow icon slides the user to the right, but not immediately
into the names database or the handwritten family tree (painstakingly
digitally rendered, since the family tree in paper form is over five
feet in length). Instead, the user is advanced to a paragraph length
introduction to Dunn’s research set against a blue scale rendering of a
page from a plantation ledger. The words “Doctors Hall,” the name of a
farm quarter owned by Mount Airy’s proprietors, loom especially large
against the zoomed-in page. As a composition, these design choices
acquaint the user with the work of a present-day historian of slavery
juxtaposed against the work of the slave-owning past as preserved by
archivists, endeavored upon by slave owners, and engaged in by the
enslaved themselves––men with names like James, Gerard, Isaac.

As the user clicks and is guided through the site from left to right
(following the logic of a book), such multilayered and intertextual
experiences continue. The next slide, against a verdant blue-scale
landscape that is neither clearly Jamaica nor Virginia, includes a query
as to why studying the lives of enslaved families across two different
plantations, in two different slaveholding societies, is important. In
Jamaica, enslaved death rates exceeded birth rates; in Virginia, slaves
built multigenerational families. On both plantations, however, those in
bondage suffered. *Two Plantations* thus outlines some of the deep
historiographical debates it wishes to illustrate. In comparative slave
studies, compiling death and birth rates, manumission records, slave
trade flows, types of crop, and other statistics has been crucial to how
historians have organized data and analyzed the violent nature of
bondage. In the past, historians have wielded quantitative data to
compare brutality in and among slaveholding societies, or the extent to
which varied European authorities destroyed the social and political
lives of Africans in the Americas. *Two Plantations* gestures to these
quantitative studies, but also to more nuanced, qualitative analyses of
slave life across the Americas by suggesting that death rates, high as
they were, should not be the only data used to determine the suffering
of the enslaved.

As the user is moved through the next two slides—one for Mesopotamia and
one for Mount Airy—information about the plantations is foregrounded.
Short paragraphs summarize demographics of the enslaved population at
each location. The three enslaved families recorded at Mesopotamia are
described as “continually stunted by death.” In contrast, the four
enslaved families recorded at Mount Airy reproduced, but “were routinely
broken up by movement and sale.” Text divulges the names of the owners
of each plantation and the user is introduced to Sally Thurston, a woman
enslaved at Mount Airy Plantation, Virginia.

More on Sally Thurston emerges as the next button diverges from the
horizontal flow and directs users downward, drawing them deeper into the
history itself. Beneath the fold, the first document is a digital
rendering of Sally Thurston’s family tree as handwritten by Dunn. The
structure of the tree is familiar—hierarchical and patronymic—and broad,
requiring the user to either use the scrolling function in the header or
to swipe left and right to view it in full. Sally is the focus, her
mothering and motherhood. In the upper right hand corner, Dunn provides
a short tally on her children with her first husband, Amphy Thurston:
thirteen children, forty-two grandchildren, and twenty-four
great-grandchildren. The tree itself, however, is shallow, either
because available records stop in 1833 or as a result of the pressure
movement, sale, and death placed on kinship networks. The visual impact
of the truncated tree brings this pressure, the loss and lost history,
into sharp relief.

Still beneath the fold, the user is guided to the right to documentation
on Mesopotamia and Sarah Affir or (Affy) and a digitized family tree of
her descendants. Sarah is the head of this tree and her children are
described using race and color terminology as articulated by Jamaican
slaveowners. Names like Mulatto Ann and Quadroon Jane proliferate. The
difference in racial nomenclature makes explicit what was implicit at
Mount Airy—that sex across the color line and all of its attendant
relations of power, violence, and property were very much a part of
enslaved women’s lives crucial to understanding enslaved family dynamics
and central to any historiographical debate on slavery in Jamaica,
Virginia or beyond. The text of Sarah’s family tree is searchable, and
with a few clicks the user discovers that the family trees of all seven
families are also available. Clicking on a name opens a dialog box with
biographical information on the individual, and the graphical user
interface makes navigating family lines easy and interesting.

The next set of documents is in database form. The members of all seven
families are listed in twin databases with identical fields—name, birth
year, family head, relationship, description, and death. This is no
small victory. When designing databases, overcoming differences between
archival documents and translating them into uniform data sets is a
serious challenge. The *Two Plantations* website resolves these
differences by organizing records by name, birth and death year, head of
the family tree, and family relationship, and then adding a description
box for more detailed commentary. Users can filter using these same
variables or toggle for individuals who appear in the archive but not in
the 1870 US census (the 1870 census was the first to count the formerly
enslaved).

The *Two Plantations* project tackles in digital form what slavery
studies attempts in analog texts—breaking the archive of its commitment
to mastery and obsession with property and therefore paternity. A final
analysis slide asks the user to consider major historiographic and
methodological questions on what it means to interpret documents related
to slavery and narrate the lived reality of the enslaved. In interviews,
Brown has described the aim of the project as encouraging users to
read/view/interact against the grain as well as with the grain.[^2] The
geography of the site maps out this imperative. As with all digital
projects, users ultimately choose how, when, and where they will enter
into the site itself. However, the experience of moving along the site’s
projected route is quite literally a journey along two axes. In walking
horizontally “against the grain” of slavery’s archive, the user is
exposed to post-1960s historiography of slavery, comparing bondage
across slave owners and plantation societies, and into the post-1990s
political and social turn toward the everyday lives of the enslaved.
Especially important, however, is the way *Two Plantations* moves the
user vertically, “with the grain” and into the archive itself. This is
not as simple as it seems. With *Two Plantations*, users engage with the
enslaved themselves by learning their names, the names of their
children, and the consistency of their family networks. At the same
time, *Two Plantations* outlines the archive created by Richard Dunn,
revealing something of the work engaged in by historians and the art of
their craft. This point that may be of special interest to graduate
students or to K–12 teachers and students in their classrooms.

Opportunities to discuss historians and their craft, the texture and
textual nature of the manuscript documents, the methodological
implications of data and databases for the study of slavery, might
require more explicit foregrounding to best impact audiences beyond
historians of slavery already well versed in these tensions and debates.
For instance, a discussion of Dunn’s encounter with the ledgers and the
information available or unavailable in them, would be of interest to a
wide range of users like archivists and librarians, scholars and
students, community members and families, as well as digital humanists
and designers.

As far as the design (which is gorgeous) is concerned, the visual impact
of the shallow family tree shapes viewers' understanding of the
brutality of slavery for families on either plantation: regardless of
birth and death rates, enslaved peoples continued to struggle to retain
ties to loved ones. However, this is also where a discussion of the
documents themselves, for which Dunn offers his own interpretative layer
(the family tree), might work well to produce a conversation within the
site or among users visiting about who and what is *missing.* Why does
the archive of slavery still continue to cause so much pain? It is both
what is present in the history and what is not that resonates with
users—and the same can be said of what is and is not present in *Two
Plantations*.

It is an important choice to begin the family trees begin with the
women, a reality of the time period and of the logics of reproduction.
However, what of the political project of a family tree that does not
take the form of the hierarchical and vertical tree diagram? Would
multidimensional data visualizations or polysingular (network analysis
using multiple pathways and nodes of intersection and interaction)
renderings of the Thurston or Affir family trees better capture the
dense networks of kin, mutuality, and precarity at play in bondage?
Would enslaved women continue to have a central role in these new models
or is “head of household” a political project that cannot be avoided, a
reality of the archive we do not dare ignore? Is it possible for digital
history to depict the enslaved in networks of kin united in a practice
of labor on behalf of and for each other as well as in biological or
fictive units tied to institutions?

*Two Plantations* digitizes an important and significant archive in an
extremely well-conceived intellectual digital project while offering
scholars a delicious design challenge. Historians of slavery designing
digital projects do battle with inherited assumptions of difference and
deviance with every keystroke. By grappling with the historiographical
debates around comparative slavery and the documentation on enslaved
families—and doing so in digital form—*Two Plantations* asks provocative
questions that leave users with more questions than answers. This, in so
many ways, is what good digital histories of difficult pasts ought to
do.

---

[^1]: *Two Plantations*, www.twoplantations.com; Richard Dunn, *A Tale
    of Two Plantations: Slave Life and Labor in Jamaica and Virginia*
    (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2014).

[^2]: Vincent Brown, “Two Plantations: Enslaved Families in Virginia and
    Jamaica,” in the presentation *The Caribbean Digital 2: Histories,
    Cartographies, Narratives*, 4 December 2015, Columbia University,
    New York.
